<1H4vs> So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in stronds afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood, 
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs 
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes, 
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ --
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight --
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb,
To chase these pagans in those holy fields,
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go; 
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmerland, 
What yesternight our Council did decree 
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question.
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of [Herfordshire] to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse' there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This matched with other did, my gracious lord,
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north, and thus it did import: 
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald, 
That ever-valiant and approved Scot, 
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
As by discharge of their artillery
And shape of likelihood the news was told;
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is [a] dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
Mordake Earl of Fife and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil? 
A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of. 
Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son --
A son who is the theme of honor's tongue,
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride,
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects, 
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up 
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this;
And for this cause a while we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our Council we
Will hold at Windsor, so inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.
I know you all, and will a while uphold
The unyoked humor of your idleness,
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wond'red at
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wished for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised, 
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes, 
And like bright metal on a sullen ground, 
My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time when men think least I will.  
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience; but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be feared, than my condition,
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud. 
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it, 
And that same greatness too which our own hands 
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.  Yea, my good lord.
Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is delivered to your Majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprision
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners,
But I remember, when the fight was done, 
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, 
Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dressed, 
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped
Showed like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose and took't away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff -- and still he smiled and talked:
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pest'red with a popingay,
Out of my grief and my impatience
Answered neglectingly, I know not what --
He should, or he should not -- for he made me mad 
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman 
Of guns, and drums, and wounds, God save the mark!
And telling me the sovereignest thing on earth
Was parmaciti for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpetre should be digged
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answered indirectly, as I said,
And I beseech you, let not his report
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.
The circumstance considered, good my lord,
What e'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach 
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, 
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who, on my soul, hath will fully betrayed
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damned Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, that Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason? and indent with fears,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war; to prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank, 
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour 
In changing hardiment with great Glendower. 
Three times they breathed and three times did they drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.
Never did bare and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds, 
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly. 
Then let not him be slandered with revolt. 
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him;
He never did encounter with Glendower.
He durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland:
We license your departure with your son.
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
And if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What? drunk with choler? Stay, and pause a while. 
Here comes your uncle.  Speak of Mortimer!
'Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cank'red Bullingbrook.
Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.
Who strook this heat up after I was gone?
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wive's brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him: was not he proclaimed
By Richard, that dead is, the next of blood?
And then it was when the unhappy king 
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon!) did set forth
From whence he intercepted did return 
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?  He did, myself did hear it.
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you, that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murtherous subornation -- shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Bring the agents or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me that I descend so low
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtile king! 
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come, 
That men of your nobility and power 
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As both of you -- God pardon it! -- have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker, Bullingbrook?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banished honors and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again;
Revenge the jeering and disdained contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
Therefore I say -- Peace, cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventerous spirit 
As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear. 
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim. 
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honor cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fadom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honor by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities;
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
I cry you mercy.  Those same noble Scots
That are your prisoners -- I'll keep them all!
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them, 
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not! 
I'll keep them, by this hand.   You start away,
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll hollow "Mortimer!"
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but "Mortimer," and give it him
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullingbrook,
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale. 
When you are better tempered to attend. 
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool 
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you,  I am [whipt] and scourged with rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bullingbrook.
In Richard's time -- what do you call the place? --
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire --
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept --
His uncle York -- where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bullingbrook --
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh --
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
"Look when his infant fortune came to age"
And "gentle Harry Percy" and "kind cousin" --
Good uncle, tell your tale -- I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again, 
We will stay your leisure.  I have done, i' faith.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners:
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted.  You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well beloved,
His brother's death at Bristow, the Lord Scroop.
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on. 
I smell it. Upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip. 
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot. 
And then the power of Scotland, and of York,
To join with Mortimer, ha?  And so they shall.
In faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear ourselves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does, we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell! No further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, 
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
So strongly that they dare not meet each other;
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned.  Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were't not for laughing, I should pity him.
O my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight been
A banished woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry "Courage! to the field!" And thou hast talked
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, 
Of prisoners' ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight; 
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war, 
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow,
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
What horse? Roan? a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.  That roan shall be my throne.
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise, but if you go --
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
And if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away, you trifler! Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and cracked crowns, 
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have with me? 
Do you not love me? do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
And when I am a' horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must, and to conclude,
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy's wife; constant you are,
But yet a woman, and for secrecy,
No lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
Whither I go, thither shall you go too; 
today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?  It must of force. 
The man I do assure you is not here, 
For I myself at this time have employed him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will by tomorrow dinner-time
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal,
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so. If he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable, and so farewell.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two a' clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,
And uncle Worcester -- a plague upon it!
I have forgot the map.    No, here it is.
Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur,
For by that name as oft as Lancaster
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale, and with
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
I cannot blame him. At my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Shaked like a coward.   Why, so it would have done
At the same season if your mother's cat had 
But kittened, though yourself had never been born. 
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
O then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldame earth, and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam earth, having this distemp'rature,
In passion shook.   Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth 
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds 
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. 
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipt in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
Peace, cousin Percy, you will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil. 
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence. 
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil! 
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bullingbrook made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottomed Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
According to our threefold order ta'en?
The Archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assigned;
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward lying off from Trent. 
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably 
(A business that this night may execute), 
tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords,
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moi'ty, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous [cantle] out.
I'll have the current in this place dammed up, 
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel fair and evenly. 
It shall not wind with such a deep indent, 
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind? It shall, it must, you see it doth.
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here,
And on this north side win this cape of land,
I'll have it so, a little charge will do it.
I'll not have it alt'red.   Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.   Who shall say me nay?
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
For I was trained up in the English court, 
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well, 
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament, 
A virtue that was never seen in you.
And I am glad of it with all my heart.
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
Than one of these same metre ballet-mongers.
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry.
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
I do not care. I'll give thrice so much land
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair, you may away by night.
Break with your wives of your departure hence. 
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.   
Fie, cousin percy, how you cross my father! 
I cannot choose. Sometime he angers me
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-winged griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what:
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer house in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read, and profited 
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable, and as bountiful 
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin? 
He holds your temper in a high respect,
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come 'cross his humor, faith, he does.
I warrant you, that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof.
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame,
And since your coming hither have done enough
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault;
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood --
And that's the dearest grace it renders you --
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which haunting a nobleman
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Well, I am schooled: good manners be your speed! 
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave. 
This is the deadly spite that angers me:
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps, she'll not part with you,
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
One that no persuasion can do good upon.
I understand thy looks. That pretty Welsh
Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens
I am too perfect in, and but for shame,
In such a parley should I answer thee. 
I understand thy kisses, and thou mine, 
And that's a feeling disputation, 
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bow'r,
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly-harnessed team
Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn. 
And those musicians that shall play to you 
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence, 
And straight they shall be here. Sit and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave "in sooth,"
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow 
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal,
Lords, give us leave, the Prince of Wales and I
For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That in his secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me;
But thou dost in thy passages of life 
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the rod of heaven, 
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, 
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art matched withal and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal;
Yet such extenuation let me beg
As in reproof of many tales devised,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear
By smiling pick-thanks and base newsmongers,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wand'red and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors. 
Thy place in Council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied, 
And art almost an alien to the hearts 
Of all the court and princes of my blood;
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackneyed in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wond'red at,
That men would tell their children, "This is he";
Others would say, "Where, which is Bullingbrook?"
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned King. 
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence, like a robe pontifical, 
Ne'er seen but wond'red at, and so my state, 
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast,
And wan by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping King, he ambled up and down,
With shallow jesters, and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt, carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys, and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative,
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoffed himself to popularity,
That, being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community, 
Such as is bent on sunlike majesty 
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes; 
But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face and rend'red such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, [gorged], and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make  blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice-gracious lord,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now by my sceptre, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou the shadow of succession. 
For of no right, nor color like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm, 
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws, 
And being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honor hath he got
Against renowmed Douglas! whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes, 
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, 
Base inclination, and the start of spleen, 
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so, you shall not find it so,
And God forgive them that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy's head,
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favors in a bloody mask,
Which washed away shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, when e'er it lights,
That this same child of honor and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honor sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! For the time will come
That I shall make this northren youth exchange 
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord, 
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf; 
And I will call him to so strict account
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if he be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your Majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this.
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury. 
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand, 
As ever off'red foul play in a state. 
The Earl of Westmerland set forth today,
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward,
On Thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire; by which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business, let's away,
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay. 
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner-time.
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple Hall
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive 
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning, percy stands on high, 
And either we or they must lower lie.     
Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum! 
Well said, my noble Scot! If speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy
The tongues of soothers, but a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word, approve me, lord.
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.  Do so, and tis well. -- 
What letters hast thou there? -- I can but thank you. 
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.
'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bears his mind, not I, my [lord].
I prithee tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
And at the time of my departure thence
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited,
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now? droop now? This sickness doth infect
The very life-blood of our enterprise,
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp. 
And that his friends by deputation could not
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed, but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement 
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us, 
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now, 
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopped off --
And yet, in faith, it is not; his present want
Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? to set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good, for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.   Faith, and so we should,
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto,
If that the devil and mischance look big 
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here. 
The quality and hair of our attempt 
Brooks no division. It will be thought
By some that know not why he is away
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence,
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause.
For well you know we of the off'ring side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us.
This absence of your father's draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Than if the Earl were here, for men must think,
If we without his help can make a head 
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down. 
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole. 
As heart can think. There is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul!
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmerland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.
No harm. What more?   And further, I have learned,
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daffed the world aside
And bid it pass?   All furnished, all in arms;
All plumed like estridges, that with the wind 
Bated like eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats like images, 
As full of spirit as the month of May, 
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
His cushes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat
As if an angel [dropped] down from the clouds
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more! worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come!
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his [altar] sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt 
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse, 
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse. 
That Glendower were come!   There is more news:
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He [cannot] draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of [yet].
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the King's whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.  Forty let it be!
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near, die all, die merrily.
Talk not of dying, I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one half year.
We'll fight with him tonight.  It may not be.
You give him then advantage.  Not a whit. 
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
So do we.  His is certain, ours is doubtful. 
Good cousin, be advised, stir not tonight.
Do not, my lord.  You do not counsel well,
You speak it out of fear and a cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well-respected honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
Which of us fears.   Yea, or tonight.   Content.
Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon,s are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester's horses came but today, 
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull, 
That not a horse is half the half of himself. 
So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceedeth our.
For God's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to God
You were of our determination!
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality, 
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so, 
So long as out of limit and true rule 
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The King hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.
The King is kind, and well we know the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore; 
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster, 
To sue his livery and beg his peace, 
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs as pages, followed him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his [country's] wrongs, and by this face, 
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for; 
Proceeded further -- cut me off the heads 
Of all the favorites that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this. Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that, deprived him of his life,
And in the neck of that, tasked the whole state;
To make that worse, suff'red his kinsman March
(Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited;
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the Council-board,
In rage dismissed my father from the court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the King? 
Not so, Sir Walter; we'll withdraw a while. 
Go to the King, and let there be impawned
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes. And so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.   Pray God you do.  
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshal,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import, you would make haste.
I guess their tenor.  Like enough you do. 
tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men 
Must bide the touch; fur, sir, at Shrewsbury, 
As I am truly given to understand,
The King with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry; and I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too,
And comes not in, overruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the King.
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is; but yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the land together.:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, 
The noble Westmerland, and warlike Blunt,
And many moe corrivals and dear men 
Of estimation and command in arms. 
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear,
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed;
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends, and so farewell, Sir Michael.
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon bulky hill! the day looks pale
At his distemp'rature.  The southern wind 
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves 
Foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day. 
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester? 'tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life 
I have not sought the day of this dislike. 
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks
Of favor from myself and all our house,
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son,
That brought you home, and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rained down fortune show'ring on your head, 
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent King, 
What with the injuries of a wanton time, 
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the King
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead;
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster,
And being fed by us you used us so
As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth 
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate, 
Proclaimed at market-crosses, read in churches, 
With some fine color that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water-colors to impaint his cause,
Nor moody beggars, starving for a time
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant, young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame, 
I have a truant been to chivalry,
And so I hear he doth account me too; 
Yet this before my father's Majesty: 
I am content that he shall take the odds
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it. No, good Worcester, no,
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin's part,
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, yea, every man
Shall be my friend again, and I'll be his.
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their office. So be gone;
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair, take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms. 
Hence therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them, 
And God befriend us as our cause is just! 
O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the King.
'Twere best he did.  Then are we all [undone];
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King should keep his word in loving us.
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offense in other faults.
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who never so tame, so cherished and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, 
The better cherished, still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot, 
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, 
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hare-brained Hotspur, governed by a spleen.
All his offenses live upon my head
And on his father's. We did train him on,
And his corruption being ta'en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,
In any case, the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will, I'll say 'tis so.
Here comes your cousin.  My uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland.
The King will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the King.
I told him gently of our grievances, 
Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us rebels, traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen, to arms! for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
And Westmerland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How showed his tasking? seemed it in contempt?
No, by my soul, I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare 
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man, 
Trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue, 
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mast'red there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause, but let me tell the world,
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamored
On his follies. Never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed! and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do 
Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
And if we live, we live to tread on kings,
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
Now for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare, the King comes on apace.
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking; only this --
Let each man do his best, and here draw I
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal 
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war, 
And by that music let us all embrace,
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name, that in battle thus
Thou crossest me? What honor dost thou seek
Upon my head?  Know then, my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought
Thy likeness, for in stead of thee, King Harry, 
This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner. 
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot, 
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
I never had triumphed upon a Scot.
All's  done, all's won, here breathless lies the King.
This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.
[A] fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The King hath many marching in his coats. 
Now by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
I'll murder all his wardrop, piece by piece, 
Until I meet the King.   Up and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day. 
Harry, withdraw thyself, thou bleedest too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I,  my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your Majesty make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
My Lord of Westmerland, lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels' arms triumph in massacres!
We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmerland,
Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come. 
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster,
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance than I did look for 
Of such an ungrown warrior.  O, this boy 
Another king? they grow like Hydra's heads.
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very King. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee, and defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet in faith thou bearest thee like a king.
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like 
Never to hold it up again! The spirits
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee, 
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly, my lord, how fares your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton. I'll to Clifton straight.
And showed thou mak'st some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God, they did me too much injury
That ever said I heark'ned for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labor of your son.
Make up to Clifton, I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey,                              
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name. 
My name is Harry Percy.   Why then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
[Nor] shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honors on thy crest
I'll crop to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth! 
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh.
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time's fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough. This earth that bears [thee] dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal; 
But let my favors hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf I'll thank myself 
For doing these fair rites of tenderness. 
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not rememb'red in thy epitaph!
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
If I were much in love with vanity!
Death hath not strook so fat a deer today,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowelled will I see thee by and by,
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Come, brother John, full bravely hast thou fleshed
Thy maiden sword. But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st. 
Why, Percy I killed myself, and saw thee dead.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace, 
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The trumpet sounds retrait, the day is our. 
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
A noble earl, and many a creature else 
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne 
Betwixt our armies true intelligence. 
What I have done my safety urged me to;
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pause upon.
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is; and I beseech your Grace
I may dispose of him.   With all my heart.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honorable bounty shall belong. 
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free. 
His valors shown upon our crests today 
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmerland
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day,
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.   
