<2H4vs> Open your ears; for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks?
I, from the orient to the drooping west
(Making the wind my post-horse), still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth.
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce, 
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
I speak of peace, while covert enmity 
Under the smile of safety wounds the world; 
And who but Rumor, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepared defense,
Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
And no such matter? Rumor is a pipe
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,
And of so easy and so plain a stop
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
The still-discordant wav'ring multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-known body to anatomize
Among my household? Why is Rumor here?
I run before King Harry's victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My office is
To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword, 
And that the King before the Douglas' rage
Stooped his anointed head as low as death. 
This have I rumored through the peasant towns 
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
And this worm-eaten [hold] of ragged stone,
[Where] Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learnt of me. From Rumor's tongues
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs. 
Who keeps the gate here ho? Where is the Earl?
What shall I say you are? Tell thou the Earl
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
His lordship is walked forth into the orchard.
Please it your honor knock but at the gate, 
And he himself will answer, Here comes the Earl. 
What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem.
The times are wild, contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose,
And bears down all before him. Noble Earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
Good, and God will! As good as heart can wish:
The King is almost wounded to the death,
And in the fortune of my lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright, and both the Blunts
Killed by the hand of Douglas, young Prince John
And Westmerland and Stafford fled the field,
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day!
So fought, so followed, and so fairly won, 
Came not till now to dignify the times,
Since Caesar's fortunes. How is this derived? 
Saw you the field? came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence,
A gentleman well bred and of good name,
That freely rend'red me these news for true.
Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent
On Tuesday last to listen after news.
My lord, I overrode him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties
More than he haply may retail from me.
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turned me back
With joyful tidings, and being better horsed,
Outrode me. After him came spurring hard
A gentleman, almost forespent with speed,
That stopped by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester, and of him 
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury.
He told me that rebellion had bad luck, 
And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold. 
With that he gave his able horse the head,
And bending forward strook his armed heels
Against the panting sides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so
He seemed in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question. Ha? Again.
Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?
Of Hotspur, Coldspur? that rebellion
Had met ill luck? My lord, I'll tell you what:
If my young lord your son have not the day,
Upon mine honor, for a silken point
I'll give my barony. Never talk of it.
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of loss? Who he?
He was some hilding fellow that had stol'n
The horse he rode on, and, upon my life, 
Spoke at a venter. Look, here comes more news.
Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
So looks the strond whereon the imperious flood
Hath left a witnessed usurpation.
Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord,
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask
To fright our party. How doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy arrand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.
This thou wouldst say, "Your son did thus and thus;
Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas" --
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds, 
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise, 
Ending with "Brother, son, and all are dead." 
Douglas is living, and your brother yet,
But for my lord your son -- Why, he is dead.
See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know
Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes
That what he feared is chanced. Yet speak, Morton,
Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
Yet for all this, say not that Percy's dead.
I see a strange confession in thine eye.
Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it fear or sin
To speak a truth. If he be slain, [say so;]
The tongue offends not that reports his death,
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive.
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news 
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell, 
Rememb'red tolling a departing friend. 
I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.
I am sorry I should force you to believe
That which I would to God I had not seen,
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied and outbreathed,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the best-tempered courage in his troops,
For from his metal was his party steeled,
Which once in him abated, all the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that's heavy in itself
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,
Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim 
Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester 
So soon ta'en prisoner, and that furious Scot, 
The bloody Douglas, whose well-laboring sword
Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,
Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs, and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all
Is that the King hath won, and hath sent out 
A speedy power to encounter you, my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster 
And Westmerland. This is the news at full. 
For this I shall have time enough to mourn;
In poison there is physic, and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have (in some measure) made me well.
And as the wretch whose fever-weak'ned joints,
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs,
Weak'ned with grief, being now enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou nice crutch!
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand; and hence, thou sickly coif!
That art a guard too wanton for the head
Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my brows with iron, and approach
The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring
To frown upon th' enraged Northumberland!
Let heaven kiss earth! now let not Nature's hand
Keep the wild flood confined! let order die! 
And let this world no longer be a stage
To feed contention in a ling'ring act; 
But let one spirit of the first-born Cain 
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead!
This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.
Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor,
The lives of all your loving complices
[Lean] on [your] health, the which, if you give o'er
To stormy passion, must perforce decay.
[You cast th' event of war, my noble lord,
And summed the accompt of chance before you said,
"Let us make head." It was your presurmise
That in the dole of blows your son might drop.
You knew he walked o'er perils, on an edge,
More likely to fall in than to get o'er;
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of wounds and scars; and that his forward spirit
Would lift him where most trade of danger ranged;
Yet did you say,"Go forth!" and none of this 
(Though strongly apprehended) could restrain
The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n? 
Or what [doth] this bold enterprise bring forth 
More than that being which was like to be?]
We all that are engaged to this loss
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas
That if we wrought out life 'twas ten to one,
And yet we ventured for the gain proposed,
Choked the respect of likely peril feared,
And since we are o'erset, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.
'Tis more than time, and, my most noble lord,
I hear for certain and dare speak the truth,
[The gentle Archbishop of York is up
With well-appointed pow'rs. He is a man
Who with a double surety binds his followers.
My lord your son had only but the corpse',
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
For that same word, rebellion, did divide
The action of their bodies from their souls,
And they did fight with queasiness, constrained
As men drink potions, that their weapons only 
Seemed on our side; but for their spirits and souls,
This word, rebellion, it had froze them up, 
As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop 
Turns insurrection to religion.
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts,
He's followed both with body and with mind;
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones;
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
Gasping for life under great Bullingbrook,
And more and less do flock to follow him.]
I knew of this before, but to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me, and counsel every man
The aptest way for safety and revenge.
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed --
Never so few, and never yet more need. 
Thus have you heard our cause and known our means,
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes.
And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied
How in our means we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the King.
Our present musters grow upon the file
To five and twenty thousand men of choice,
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns 
With an incensed fire of injuries.
The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus: 
Whether our present five and twenty thousand
May hold up head without Northumberland?
With him, we may. Yea, marry, there's the point!
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgment is we should not step too far
[Till we had his assistance by the hand.
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this,
Conjecture, expectation, and surmise
Of aids incertain should not be admitted.]
'Tis very true, Lord Bardolph, for indeed
It was young Hotspur's cause at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord, who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air, and promise of supply,
Flatt'ring himself in project of a power
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts,
And so with great imagination,
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death,
And winking, leapt into destruction. 
But by your leave, it never yet did hurt
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope. 
Yes, if this present quality of war -- 
Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot --
Lives so in hope, as in an early spring
We see th' appearing buds, which to prove fruit
Hope gives not so much warrant, as despair
That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot, then draw the model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the erection,
Which if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the model
In fewer offices, or at least desist
To build at all? Much more, in this great work
(Which is, almost, to pluck a kingdom down
And set another up), should we survey
The plot of situation and the model,
Consent upon a sure foundation,
Question surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a work to undergo,
To weigh against his opposite; or else]
We fortify in paper and in figures, 
Using the names of men in stead of men,
Like [one] that draws the model of an house 
Beyond his power to build it, who, half thorough, 
Gives o'er, and leaves his part-created cost
A naked subject to the weeping clouds
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
Grant that our hopes (yet likely of fair birth)
Should be still-born, and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation,
I think we are so body strong enough,
Even as we are, to equal with the King.
What, is the King but five and twenty thousand?
To us no more, nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph,
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
[Are] in three heads: one power against the French,
And one against Glendower; perforce a third
Must take up us. So is the unfirm King
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his several strengths together, 
And come against us in full puissance,
Need not to be dreaded. If he should do so, 
[To] French and Welsh he leaves his back unarmed,
They baying him at the heels. Never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmerland;
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
But who is substituted against the French,
I have no certain notice. Let us on!
And publish the occasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice,
Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.
An habitation giddy and unsure
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond many, with what loud applause
Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bullingbrook
Before he was what thou wouldst have him be!
And being now trimmed in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him,
That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up. 
So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard, 
And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up, 
And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these times?
They that, when Richard lived, would have him die,
Are now become enamored on his grave.
Thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on
After th' admired heels of Bullingbrook,
Cri'st now, "O earth, yield us that king again,
And take thou this!" O thoughts of men accursed!
Past and to come seems best; things present worst.]
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?
We are time's subjects, and time bids be gone. 
Master Fang, have you ent'red the action? It is ent'red.
Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman?
Will 'a stand to't? Sirrah! Where's Snare?
O Lord, ay! good Master Snare. Here, here. 
Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.
How now, Sir John? what are you brawling here? 
Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have been well on your way to York. 
No, fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,
Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
You shall have letters of me presently. 
Come, go along with me, good Master Gower. 
I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter, 
Give even way unto my rough affairs; 
Put not you on the visage of the times,
And be like them to Percy troublesome.
I have given over, I will speak no more;
Do what you will, your wisdom be your guide.
Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn,
And but my going, nothing can redeem it.
O yet for God's sake, go not to these wars!
The time was, father, that you broke your word
When you were more [endeared] to it than now,
When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to see his father
Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honors lost, yours and your son's:
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the grey vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the chevalry of England move
To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass 
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves:
[He had no legs that practiced not his gait; 
And speaking thick (which nature made his blemish) 
Became the accents of the valiant;
For those that could speak low and tardily
Would turn their own perfection to abuse
To seem like him; so that in speech, in gait,
In diet, in affections of delight,
In military rules, humors of blood,
He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
That fashioned others. And him, O wondrous him!
O miracle of men! him did you leave,
Second to none, unseconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In disadvantage, to abide a field
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
Did seem defensible: so you left him.
Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
To hold your honor more precise and nice
With others than with him! Let them alone. 
The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers, 
today might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck, 
Have talked of Monmouth's grave.] Beshrew your heart,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me
With new lamenting ancient oversights,
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place,
And find me worse provided. O, fly to Scotland,
Till that the nobles and the armed commons
Have of their puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them, like a rib of steel,
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your son,
He was so suff'red; so came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven,
For recordation to my noble husband. 
Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind 
As with the tide swelled up unto his height, 
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland; there am I,
Till time and vantage crave my company. 
These be good humors indeed! Shall pack-horses 
And hollow pampered jades of Asia, 
Which cannot go but thirty mile a day,
Compare with Caesars and with Cannibals
And Troiant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with
King Cerberus, and let the welkin roar.
A' my word, captain, there's none such here.
What the good-year, do you think I would deny her?
Fear we broadsides? no, let the fiend give fire.
Give me some sack, and, sweet heart, lie thou there. 
What? shall we have incision? shall we imbrue? 
Why then let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
The King your father is at Westminster, 
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
Come from the north, and as I came along 
I met and overtook a dozen captains, 
Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
And asking every one for Sir John Falstaff.
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame
So idly to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion, like the south
Borne with black vapor, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night.
You must away to court, sir, presently,
A dozen captains stay at door for you.
She comes blubbered. -- Yea! will you come, Doll? 
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters
And well consider of them. Make good speed. 
How many thousand of my poorest subjects 
Are at this hour asleep! O sleep! O gentle sleep! 
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sound of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god, why li'st thou with the vile
In loathsome beds, and leavest the kingly couch
A watch-case or a common 'larum-bell?
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy [mast]
Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge,
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian [billows] by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them
With deafing clamor in the slippery clouds,
That with the hurly death itself awakes? 
Canst thou, O partial sleep, give [then] repose
To the wet [sea-boy] in an hour so rude, 
And in the calmest and most stillest night, 
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then (happy) low, lie down!
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Many good morrows to your Majesty!
Why then good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o'er the [letters] that I sent you?
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
How foul it is, what rank diseases grow,
And with what danger, near the heart of it.
It is but as a body yet distempered,
Which to his former strength may be restored
With good advice and little medicine.
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.
O God, that one might read the book of fate,
And see the revolution of the times 
Make mountains level, and the continent,
Weary of solid firmness, melt itself 
Into the sea, and other times to see 
The beachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chance's mocks
And changes fill the cup of alteration
With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
Would shut the book, and sit him down and die.
Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together, and in two year after
Were they at wars. It is but eight years since
This Percy was the man nearest my soul,
Who like a brother toiled in my affairs,
And laid his love and life under my foot,
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by --
You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember --
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then checked and rated by Northumberland, 
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
"Northumberland, thou ladder by the which 
My cousin Bullingbrook ascends my throne" 
(Though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bowed the state
That I and greatness were compelled to kiss),
"The time shall come," thus did he follow it,
"The time will come, that foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption": so went on,
Foretelling this same time's condition
And the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men's lives,
Figuring the natures of the times deceased,
The which observed, a man may prophesy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
And weak beginning lie intreasured.
Such things become the hatch and brood of time,
And by the necessary form of this
King Richard might create a perfect guess
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon 
Unless on you. Are these things then necessities? 
Then let us meet them like necessities; 
And that same word even now cries out on us.
They say the Bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong. It cannot be, my lord.
Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
The powers that you already have sent forth
Shall bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance that Glendower is dead.
Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
And these unseasoned hours perforce must add
Unto your sickness. I will take your counsel,
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land. 
'Tis Gaultree forest, and't shall please your Grace.
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth
To know the numbers of our enemies.
We have sent forth already. 'Tis well done.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
I must acquaint you that I have received 
New-dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy; whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes, 
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers
That your attempts may overlive the hazard 
And fearful meeting of their opposite. 
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
And dash themselves to pieces. Now, what news?
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we have them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
I think it is my Lord of Westmerland.
Health and fair greeting from our general,
The Prince, Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on, my Lord of Westmerland, in peace,
What doth concern your coming. Then, my lord, 
Unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion 
Came like itself, in base and abject routs, 
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,
And countenanced by boys and beggary --
I say, if damned commotion so [appeared]
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble lords
Had not been here to dress the ugly form
Of base and bloody insurrection
With your fair honors. You, Lord Archbishop,
Whose see is by a civil peace maintained,
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched,
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored,
Whose white investments figure innocence,
The dove, and very blessed spirit of peace,
Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war?
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine
To a loud trumpet and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this? so the question stands. 
Briefly, to this end: we are all diseased,
[And with our surfeiting and wanton hours 
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever, 
And we must bleed for it; of which disease
Our late King Richard (being infected) died.
But, my most noble Lord of Westmerland,
I take not on me here as a physician,
Nor do I as an enemy to peace
Troop in the throngs of military men;
But rather show a while like fearful war
To diet rank minds sick of happiness,
And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop
Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weighed
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
And find our griefs heavier than our offenses.
We see which way the stream of time doth run,
And are enforced from our most quiet there
By the rough torrent of occasion,
And have the summary of all our griefs
(When time shall serve) to show in articles;
Which long ere this we offered to the King, 
And might by no suit gain our audience.
When we are wronged and would unfold our griefs, 
We are denied access unto his person 
Even by those men that most have done us wrong.]
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth
With yet appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute's instance (present now)
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace, or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.
When ever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer hath been suborned to grate on you?
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine.
My brother general, the commonwealth,
I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before, 
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand 
Upon our honors? O, my good Lord Mowbray,
Construe the times to their necessities,
And you shall say, indeed, it is the time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet, for your part, it not appears to me,
Either from the King or in the present time,
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a grief on. Were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolk's signories,
Your noble and right well-rememb'red father's?
What thing, in honor, had my father lost,
That need to be revived and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the state stood then,
Was [force] perforce compelled to banish him;
And then that Henry Bullingbrook and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
And the loud trumpet blowing them together; 
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed
My father from the breast of Bullingbrook, 
O, when the King did throw his warder down 
(His own life hung upon the staff he threw),
Then threw he down himself and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
Have since miscarried under Bullingbrook.
You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.
The Earl of Herford was reputed then
In England the most valiant gentleman.
Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled?
But if your father had been victor there,
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry;
For all the country in a general voice
Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
Were set on Herford, whom they doted on
And blessed and graced and did, more than the King --
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace
That he will give you audience, and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just, 
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off
That might so much as think you enemies. 
But he hath forced us to compel this offer, 
And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so;
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
For lo, within a ken our army lies:
Upon mine honor, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armor all as strong, our cause the best;
Then reason will our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then our offer is compelled.
Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.
That argues but the shame of your offense:
A rotten case abides no handling.
Hath the Prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
That is intended in the general's name.
I muse you make so slight a question. 
Then take, my Lord of Westmerland, this schedule, 
For this contains our general grievances: 
Each several article herein redressed,
All members of our cause, both here and hence,
That are ensinewed to this action
Acquitted by a true substantial form
And present execution of our wills --
To us and [to] our purposes confined
We come within our aweful banks again,
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
This will I show the general. Please you, lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
[And] either end in peace, which God so frame!
Or to the place of diff'rence call the swords
Which must decide it. My lord, we will do so
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not that; if we can make our peace
Upon such large terms and so absolute 
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains. 
Yea, but our valuation shall be such 
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action,
That were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord, note this: the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances,
For he hath found to end one doubt by death
Revives two greater in the heirs of life;
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean
And keep no tell-tale to his memory
That may repeat and history his loss
To new remembrance; for full well he knows
He cannot so precisely weed this land
As his misdoubts present occasion.
His foes are so enrooted with his friends
That, plucking to unfix an enemy, 
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend,
So that this land, like an offensive wife 
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes, 
As he is striking, holds his infant up
And hangs resolved correction in the arm
That was upreared to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very instruments of chastisement,
So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
May offer, but not hold. 'Tis very true,
And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshal,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will, like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking. Be it so.
Here is returned my Lord of Westmerland.
The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your lordship
To meet his Grace just distance 'tween our armies.
Your Grace of York, in God's name then set forward.
Before, and greet his Grace. -- My lord, we come. 
You are well encount'red here, my cousin Mowbray,
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.
My Lord of York, it better showed with you
When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
Encircled you to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy text
[Than] now to see you here an iron man, talking,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword and life to death. 
That man that sits within a monarch's heart
And ripens in the sunshine of his favor, 
Would he abuse the countenance of the King, 
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach
In shadow of such greatness? With you, Lord Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken
How deep you were within the books of God?
To us the speaker in his parliament,
To us th' [imagined] voice of God himself,
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
And our dull workings? O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
[Employ] the countenance and grace of heav'n,
As a false favorite doth his prince's name,
In deeds dishonorable? You have ta'en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of his substitute, my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him
Have here upswarmed them. Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your father's peace,
But as I told my Lord of Westmerland, 
The time misord'red doth, in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form 
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace 
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court,
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep
With grant of our most just and right desires,
And true obedience, of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
To the last man. And though we here fall down
We have supplies to second our attempt;
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them,
And so success of mischief shall be born,
And heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up
Whiles England shall have generation.
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow,
To sound the bottom of the after-times.
Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
How far forth you do like their articles. 
I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here, by the honor of my blood, 
My father's purposes have been mistook, 
And some about him have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning and authority.
My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redressed,
Upon my soul they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours, and here between the armies
Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
Of our restored love and amity.
I take your princely word for redresses.
I give it you, and will maintain my word,
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.
Go, captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them. Hie thee, captain.
To you, my noble Lord of Westmerland.
I pledge your Grace, and if you knew what pains 
I have bestowed to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely. But my love to ye 
Shall show itself more openly hereafter. 
I do not doubt you. I am glad of it.
Health to my lord, and gentle cousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry, coz, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus, some good thing comes tomorrow.
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse, if your own rule be true. 
The word of peace is rend'red. Hark how they shout!
This had been cheerful after victory.
A peace is of the nature of a conquest,
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loser. Go, my lord, 
And let our army be discharged too.
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains 
March by us, that we may peruse the men
We should have coped withal. Go, good Lord Hastings,
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.
Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.
My lord, our army is dispersed already:
Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses
East, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings! for the which
I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason, 
And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both. 
Is this proceeding just and honorable? 
Will you thus break your faith? I pawned thee none.
I promised you redress of these same grievances
Whereof you did complain, which, by mine honor,
I will perform with a most Christian care.
But for you rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion [and such acts as yours].
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums, pursue the scatt'red stray;
God, and not we, hath safely fought today.
Some guard [these traitors] to the block of death,
Treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath. 
The heat is past, follow no further now;
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmerland. 
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, then you come.
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
One time or other break some gallows' back.
That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.
Retrait is made and execution stayed.
Send Colevile with his confederates
To York, to present execution.
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords,
I hear the King my father is sore sick.
Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,
Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.
Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.
The army is discharged all and gone.
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
And draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish.
Only, we want a little personal strength; 
And pause us till these rebels, now afoot,
Come underneath the yoke of government. 
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty 
Shall soon enjoy. Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,
I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
And how accompanied? I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?
No, my good lord, he is in presence here.
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy;
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation, after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren. 
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace 
By seeming cold or careless of his will, 
For he is gracious if he be observed,
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for [meting] charity;
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he is flint,
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth;
But, being moody, give him time and scope,
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
Mingled with venom of suggestion
(As, force perforce, the age will pour it in),
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
As aconitum or rash gunpowder. 
I shall observe him with all care and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas? 
He is not there today, he dines in London.
And how accompanied? [Canst thou tell that?]
With Poins, and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he, the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them; therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
In forms imaginary, th' unguided days
And rotten times that you shall look upon,
When I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
O, with what wings shall his affections fly
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite:
The Prince but studies his companions 
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,
'Tis needful that the most immodest word 
Be looked upon and learnt, which once attained, 
Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will in the perfectness of time
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern or a measure live,
By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,
Turning past evils to advantages.
'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
In the dead carrion. Who's here? Westmerland?
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver!
Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all,
Are brought to the correction of your law.
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed,
But Peace puts forth her olive every where.
The manner how this action hath been borne 
Here at more leisure may your Highness read,
With every course in his particular. 
O Westmerland, thou art a summer bird, 
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day. Look here's more news.
From enemies heavens keep your Majesty,
And, when they stand against you, may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of!
The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
With a great power of English and of Scots,
Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
The manner and true order of the fight
This packet, please it you, contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But [write] her fair words still in foulest terms?
She either gives a stomach and no food --
Such are the poor, in health; or else a feast
And takes away the stomach -- such are the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not. 
I should rejoice now at this happy news,
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy. 
O me! come near me, now I am much ill. 
Comfort, your Majesty! O my royal father!
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
Be patient, Princes, you do know these fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air, he'll straight be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs.
Th' incessant care and labor of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through [and will break out].
The people fear me, for they do observe
Unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature.
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months asleep and leapt them over.
The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between,
And the old folk (time's doting chronicles)
Say it did so a little time before
That our great-grandsire, Edward, sicked and died.
Speak lower, Princes, for the King recovers. 
This apoplexy will certain be his end.
I pray you take me up, and bear me hence 
Into some other chamber. [Softly, pray.] 
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favorable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.
Call for the music in the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
Less noise, less noise! Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
Exceeding ill. Heard he the good news yet? 
He alt'red much upon the hearing it.
Not so much noise, my lords. Sweet Prince, speak low,
The King your father is disposed to sleep.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Will't please your Grace to go along with us?
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polished perturbation! golden care!
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night, sleep with it now!
Yet not so sound, and half so deeply sweet,
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armor worn in heat of day, 
That scald'st with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not. 
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down 
Perforce must move. My gracious lord! my father!
This sleep is sound indeed, this is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorced
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me. Lo where it sits,
Which God shall guard; and put the world's whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force 
This lineal honor from me. This from thee
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me. 
Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence! Doth the King call?
What would your Majesty? [How fares your Grace?]
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales, where is he? Let me see him.
This door is open, he is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we stayed.
Where is the crown? who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
The Prince hath ta'en it hence. Go seek him out. 
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose
Find him, my Lord of Warwick, chide him hither. 
This part of his conjoins with my disease,
And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are!
How quickly nature falls into revolt
For this the foolish over-careful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts, their brains with care,
For this they have engrossed and piled up
The cank'red heaps of strange-achieved gold;
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises;
When like the bee tolling from every flower
Our [thighs] packed with wax, our mouths with honey,
We bring it to the hive, and like the bees,
Are murd'red for our pains. This bitter taste
Yields his engrossments to the ending father.
Now, where is he that will not stay so long
Till his friend sickness [have] determined me? 
My lord, I found the Prince in the next room, 
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow
That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,
Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife
With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
Lo where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry.
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.
I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought:
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honors
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth,
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind 
That it will quickly drop; my day is dim.
Thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours 
Were thine without offense, and at my death 
Thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou lovedst me not,
And thou wilt have me die assured of it.
Thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Whom thou hast whetted on thy stony heart
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head;
Only compound me with forgotten dust;
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms,
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at form.
Harry the Fift is crowned! Up, vanity!
Down, royal state! All you sage counsellors, hence!
And to the English court assemble now,
From every region, apes of idleness! 
Now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum!
Have you a ruffin that will swear, drink, dance, 
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit 
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his treble guilt,
England shall give him office, honor, might;
For the fift Harry from curbed license plucks
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
O, thou wilt be a wilderness again,
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants!
O, pardon me, my liege! but for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestalled this dear and deep rebuke
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown;
And He that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours! If I affect it more
Than as your honor and as your renown, 
Let me no more from this obedience rise, 
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit 
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending. 
God witness with me, when I here came in,
How cold it strook my heart! If I do feign,
O, let me in my present wildness die,
And never live to show th' incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed!
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spake unto this crown as having sense,
And thus upbraided it: "The care on thee depending
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore thou best of gold art [worst of] gold.
Other, less fine in carat, [is] more precious,
Preserving life in med'cine potable;
But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned,
Hast eat thy bearer up." Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it, as with an enemy
That had before my face murdered my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor. 
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride, 
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine 
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head,
And make me as the poorest vassal is
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!
God put [it] in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it!
Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear (I think) the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son,
By what by-paths and indirect crooked ways
I met this crown, and I myself know well
How troublesome it sate upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. It seemed in me
But as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand, 
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their assistances, 
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed, 
Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears
Thou seest with peril I have answered;
For all my reign hath been but as a scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort;
So thou the garland wear'st successively.
Yet though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green,
And all [my] friends, which thou must make thy friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out;
By whose fell working I was first advanced,
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displaced; which to avoid,
I cut them off, and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest and lying still might make them look
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds 
With foreign quarrels, that action, hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days. 
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so 
That strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, O God forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live!
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more than with a common pain
'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father!
Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John,
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare withered trunk. Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick? My Lord of Warwick! 
Doth any name particular belong 
Unto the lodging where I first did swound? 
'Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.
Laud be to God! even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not die but in Jerusalem,
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land.
But bear me to that chamber, there I'll lie,
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die. 
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.
You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?
Exceeding well, his cares are now all ended.
I hope, not dead. He's walked the way of nature,
And to our purposes he lives no more.
I would his Majesty had called me with him; 
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries. 
Indeed I think the young King loves you not. 
I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry.
O that the living Harry had the temper
Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many nobles then should hold their places,
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
O God, I fear all will be overturned!
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.
We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk. 
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy! 
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier! 
O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed,
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
I am the sorrier, would 'twere otherwise!
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of quality.
Sweet Princes, what I did, I did in honor,
Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestalled remission.
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I'll to the King my master that is dead,
And tell him who hath sent me after him.
Good morrow, and God save your Majesty! 
This new and gorgeous garment, majesty,
Sits not so easy on me as you think.
Brothers, you [mix] your sadness with some fear:
This is the English, not the Turkish court,
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,
But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
For by my faith it very well becomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
That I will deeply put the fashion on
And wear it in my heart. Why then be sad,
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Than a joint burden laid upon us all.
For me, by heaven (I bid you be assured),
I'll be your father and your brother too.
Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I,
But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.
You all look strangely on me, and you most.
You are, I think, assured I love you not. 
I am assured, if I be measured rightly, 
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
How might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison
Th' immediate heir of England! Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?
I then did use the person of your father,
The image of his power lay then in me,
And in th' administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And strook me in my very seat of judgment;
Whereon (as an offender to your father)
I gave bold way to my authority,
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought? 
To pluck down justice from your aweful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword 
That guards the peace and safety of your person? 
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image,
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours:
Be now the father and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdained;
And then imagine me taking your part,
And in your power soft silencing your son.
After this cold considerance, sentence me,
And as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right justice, and you weigh this well,
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword,
And I do wish your honors may increase,
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you and obey you, as I did.
So shall I live to speak my father's words: 
"Happy am I, that have a man so bold,
That dares do justice on my proper son; 
And not less happy, having such a son 
That would deliver up his greatness so
Into the hands of justice." You did commit me;
For which I do commit into your hand
Th' unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance, that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop and humble my intents
To your well-practiced wise directions.
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you,
My father is gone wild into his grave;
For in his tomb lie my affections,
And with his spirits sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to rase out
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me
Hath proudly flowed in vanity till now; 
Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods, 
And flow henceforth in formal majesty. 
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best governed nation,
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us,
In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
Our coronation done, we will accite
(As I before rememb'red) all our state,
And (God consigning to my good intents)
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
God shorten Harry's happy life one day! 
Puff i' thy teeth, most recreant coward base!
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,
And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,
And golden times, and happy news of price.
A foutre for the world and worldlings base!
I speak of Africa and golden joys.
O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news? 
Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.
Under which king, besonian? Speak, or die.
Under King Harry. Harry the Fourth, or Fift?
Harry the Fourth. A foutre for thine office!
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king;
Harry the Fift's the man. I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this, and fig me like
The bragging Spaniard. What, is the old king dead?
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.
'Tis [all] in every part. 'Tis so indeed. 
My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver,
Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in base durance and contagious prison,
By most mechanical and dirty hand.
For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.
There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
God save thy Grace, King Hal! my royal Hal!
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.
Have you your wits? know you what 'tis you speak? 
My King, my Jove! I speak to thee, my heart!
I know thee not, old man, fall to thy prayers.
How ill white hairs becomes a fool and jester!
I have long dreamt of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane;
But being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body (hence) and more thy grace,
Leave gormandizing, know the grave doth gape
For thee thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest,
Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turned away my former self;
So will I those that kept me company.
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots.
Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils,
And as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will, according to your strengths and qualities, 
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,
To see performed the tenure of my word. 
Go carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.
Take all his company along with him. 
I cannot now speak, I will hear you soon.
I like this fair proceeding of the King's.
He hath intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banished till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.
The King hath called his parliament, my lord.
I will lay odds that ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire
As far as France. I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King.
