<ADOVS> But few of any sort, and none of name.
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
O, he's returned, and as pleasant as ever he was. 
He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
No, and he were, I would burn my study.
Her mother hath many times told me so. 
Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
I wonder that you will still be talking,
Signior Benedick, nobody marks you.
What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
Your hand, Leonato, we will go together.
I noted her not, but I looked on her.
Is she not a modest young lady?
No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
My liege, your Highness now may do me good.
My love is thine to teach; teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any son, my lord? 
No child but Hero, she's his only heir. 
Dost thou affect her, Claudio? O my lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldier's eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love.
But now I am returned, and that war-thoughts
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.
Thou wilt be like a lover presently,
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her, and with her father,
And thou shalt have her. Was't not to this end
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
How sweetly you do minister to love,
But lest my liking might too sudden seem, 
I would have salved it with a longer treatise.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood? 
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Look what will serve is fit: 'tis once, thou lovest,
And I will fit thee with the remedy.
I know we shall have revelling tonight;
I will assume thy part in some disguise,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale;
Then after to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
In practice let us put it presently.
Good cousin, have a care this busy time.
And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?
Can you make no use of your discontent?
I make all use of it, for I use it only.
Who comes here? What news, Borachio? 
Which is one? I say my prayers aloud.
I love you the better; the hearers may cry amen. 
God match me with a good dancer! Amen.
I know you by the waggling of your head.
Will you not tell me who told you so?
Nor will you not tell me who you are? Not now.
What's he? I am sure you know him well enough.
Not I, believe me. Did he never make you laugh?
You may do the part of an honest man in it.
Thus answer I in name of Benedick,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
'Tis certain so, the Prince woos for himself.
Friendship is constant in all other things
Save in the office and affairs of love;
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for itself,
And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
She were an excellent wife for Benedick.
Yea, my good lord.  How still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony! 
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
O, very well, my lord.  The music ended,
We'll fit the [hid]-fox with a pennyworth.
Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
O good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
To slander music any more than once.
It is the witness still of excellency
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,
Yet will he swear he loves. Nay, pray thee come,
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes. Note this before my notes:
There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting. 
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks -- 
He hath ta'en th' infection.  Hold it up. 
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
No, and swears she never will.  That's her torment.
'Tis true indeed, so your daughter says.
In every thing but in loving Benedick.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor,
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
Whisper her ear, and tell her I and Ursley
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it.  There will she 
To listen our propose. This is thy office; 
Bear thee well in it, and leave us alone.
I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently. 
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit.
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice.  Of this matter
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay. Now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait;
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue. 
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing 
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it. 
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful,
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
As haggards of the rock. But are you sure
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the Prince and my new-trothed lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so?  Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
O god of love! I know he doth deserve
As much as may be yielded to a man;
But nature never framed a woman's heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, 
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly that to her 
All matter else seems weak. She cannot love, 
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endeared. Sure I think so,
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it.
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward.  If fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agot very vildly cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable. 
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me 
Out of myself, press me to death with wit. 
Therefore let Benedick, like covered fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it, hear what she will say.
No, rather I will go to Benedick,
And counsel him to fight against his passion,
And truly I'll devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.
O, do not do your cousin such a wrong.
She cannot be so much without true judgment --
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prized to have -- as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.
I pray you be not angry with me, madam,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing, argument, and valor, 
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed he hath an excellent good name. 
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it. 
Why, every day tomorrow.  Come go in,
I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
Which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.
She's limed, I warrant you.  We have caught her, madam.
If it prove so, then loving goes by haps:
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu!
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And, Benedick, love on, I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band;
For others say thou dost deserve, and I 
Believe it better than reportingly.
I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him.
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
Yet is this no charm for the toothache. 
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice.
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
Means your lordship to be married tomorrow? 
'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
Of what, lady?  of speaking honorably?
Good morrow, coz. Good morrow, sweet Hero. 
Why, how now?  Do you speak in the sick tune?
I am out of all other tune, methinks.
Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back whose worth 
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again. 
Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
There, Leonato, take her back again.
Give not this rotten orange to your friend,
She's but the sign and semblance of her honor.
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O, what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue?  Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
What do you mean, my lord? Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity --
I know what you would say.  If I have known her,
You will say, she did embrace me as a husband, 
And so extenuate the 'forehand sin. 
I never tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity and comely love.
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?
Out on thee seeming!  I will write against it:
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pamp'red animals
That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet Prince, why speak not you? What should I speak?
I stand dishonored, that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true. 
This looks not like a nuptial. "True"!  O God! 
Is this the Prince? is this the Prince's brother?
Is this face Hero's? are our eyes our own?
All this is so, but what of this, my lord?
Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
O God defend me, how am I beset!
What kind of catechising call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero?  Who can blot that name
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
What man was he talked with you yesternight
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now if you are a maid, answer to this.
I talked with no man at that hour, my lord.
Why then are you no maiden. Leonato, 
I am sorry you must hear. Upon mine honor,
Myself, my brother, and this grieved count 
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night 
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window,
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
Fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord,
There is not chastity enough in language
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
O Hero! what a Hero hadst thou been,
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair!  Farewell,
Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
Hath no man's dagger here a point for me? 
Why, how now, cousin, wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go.  These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up. How doth the lady?
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand,
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for. How now, cousin Hero?
Wherefore? why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes;
For did I think thou wouldst not quickly die, 
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches, 
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one? 
Chid I for that at frugal nature's fame?
O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
Who smirched thus and mired with infamy,
I might have said, "No part of it is mine;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins"?
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised,
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her -- why, she, O she is fall'n
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh! Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part I am so attired in wonder,
O, on my soul, my cousin is belied! 
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No, truly, not, although until last night, 
I have this twelvemonth  been her bedfellow. 
Confirmed, confirmed!  O, that is stronger made
Which was before barred up with ribs of iron!
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears?  Hence from her, let her die.
For I have only been silent so long,
And given way unto this course of fortune,
By noting of the lady. I have marked
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
And in her eye there hath appeared a fire
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
Trust not my reading, nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenure of my book; trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity, 
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Under some biting error.  Friar, it cannot be. 
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
A sin of perjury; she not denies it.
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me, I know none.
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy!  O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintained the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
There is some strange misprision in the princes. 
Two of them have the very bent of honor,
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practice of it lives in John the Bastard, 
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.
I know not. If they speak but truth of her, 
These hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honor, 
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb, and policy of mind,
Ability in means, and choice of friends, 
To quit me of them throughly. Pause awhile, 
And let my counsel sway you in this case. 
Your daughter here the [princes] left for dead,
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed.
And on your family's old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs, and do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become of this? what will this do?
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse; that is some good.
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth:
She dying, as it must be so maintained,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excused
Of every hearer; for it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost,
Why then we rack the value; then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us 
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she died upon his words, 
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come apparelled in more precious habit,
More moving, delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she lived indeed.  Then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her;
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be levelled false,
The supposition of the lady's death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you, 
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio, 
Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this 
As secretly and justly as your soul
'Tis well consented; presently away,
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
Come, lady, die to live; this wedding-day
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
You have no reason, I do it freely.
Is there any way to show such friendship?
A very even way, but no such friend.
It is a man's office, but not yours.
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Tarry, good Beatrice.  By this hand, I love thee.
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Is our whole dissembly appeared?
O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
Pray write down Borachio.  Yours, sirrah?
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade. 
Write down Master Gentleman Conrade.
Masters, do you serve God?  Yea, sir, we hope. 
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.  I pray thee cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine,
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form;
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
And, sorrow wag, cry "hem!" when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make his fortune drunk 
With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me,
But there is no such man, for, brother, men 
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel, but tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial med'cine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air, and agony with words.
No, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel,
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee peace. I will be flesh and blood,
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods,
And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself;
Make those that do offend you suffer too. 
There thou speak'st reason; nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied, 
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince, 
And all of them that thus dishonor her.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
Good den, good den. Good day to both of you.
Hear you, my lords -- We have some haste, Leonato.
Some haste, my lord!  Well, fare you well, my lord.
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low. Who wrongs him?
Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou --
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword,
I fear thee not.  Marry, beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear. 
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword. 
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me;
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do
Were I not old.  Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child!
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors --
O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy!
My villainy? Thine, Claudio, thine, I say.
You say not right, old man. My lord, my lord,
I'll prove it on his body, if he dare,
Despite his nice fence and his active practice, 
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
Away, I will not have to do with you. 
Canst thou so daff me?  Thou hast killed my child.
If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed;
But that's no matter, let him kill one first.
Win me and wear me, let him answer me.
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Content yourself.  God knows I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slandered to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops!
Hold you content.  What, man!  I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple --
Scambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys, 
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly, and show outward hideousness, 
And speak [off] half a dozen dang'rous words, 
How they might hurt their enemies -- if they durst --
But, brother Anthony -- Come,'tis no matter;
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death;
But on my honor she was charged with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proof.
My lord, my lord -- I will not hear you.
No? Come, brother, away!  I will be heard.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
Now, signior, what news? Good day, my lord. 
In a false quarrel there is no true valor.
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.
But did my brother set thee on to this?
Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.
He is composed and framed of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy. 
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first. 
Which is the villain?  Let me see his eyes,
That when I note another man like him
I may avoid him.  Which of these is he?
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed
Mine innocent child? Yea, even I alone.
No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself.
Here stand a pair of honorable men,
A third is fled, that had a hand in it. 
I thank you, princes, for my daughter's death;
Record it with your high and worthy deeds. 
'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it. 
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself,
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin; yet sinned I not,
But in mistaking. By my soul, nor I,
And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live --
That were impossible -- but I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died, and if your love
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
And sing it to her bones, sing it tonight.
tomorrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead, 
And she alone is heir to both of us.
Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin, 
And so dies my revenge.  O noble sir!
Your overkindness doth wring tears from me.
I do embrace your offer, and dispose
tomorrow then I will expect your coming
tonight I take my leave.  This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packed in all this wrong,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath been just and virtuous
In any thing that I do know by her.
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.
Farewell, my lords, we look for you tomorrow.
We will not fail. tonight I'll mourn with Hero.
Bring you these fellows on. -- We'll talk with Margaret, 
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?
Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
Only foul words -- and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.
Good morrow, masters, put your torches out.
The wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day,
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
Thanks to you all, and leave us.  Fare you well.
Good morrow, masters -- each his several way.
Come let us hence, and put on other weeds,
And then to Leonato's we will go.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's
Than this for whom we rend'red up this woe.
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her
Upon the error that you heard debated.
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither masked.
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me. You know your office, brother:
You must be father to your brother's daughter, 
Which I will do with confirmed countenance. 
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think. 
To bind me, or undo me -- one of them.
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.
That eye my daughter lent her, 'tis most true.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince. But what's your will?
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical,
But for my will, my will is your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined
In the state of honorable marriage,
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking. And my help.
Good morrow, Prince; good morrow, Claudio;
We here attend you. Are you yet determined
today to marry with my brother's daughter?
I'll hold my mind were she an Ethiope.
Call her forth, brother, here's the friar ready. 
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter,
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness?
I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
Tush, fear not, man, we'll tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your father's cow,
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
For this I owe you:  here comes other reck'nings. 
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I do give you her.
Why then she's mine.  Sweet, let me see your face.
No, that you shall not till you take her hand,
Before this friar, and swear to marry her.
Give me your hand before this holy friar --
I am your husband if you like of me.
And when I lived, I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
Another Hero! Nothing certainer:
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero!  Hero that is dead!
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended, 
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death.
Mean time let wonder seem familiar, 
And to the chapel let us presently. 
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
I answer to that name. What is your will?
Do not you love me? Why, no, no more than reason.
Why then your uncle and the Prince and Claudio
Why then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman. 
And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her,
For here's a paper written in his hand, 
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain, 
Fashioned to Beatrice. And here's another
Writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedick.
How dost thou, Benedick the married man?
My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight, 
And brought with armed men back to Messina.
