<AWWVS> What hope is there of his Majesty's amendment?
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape! Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness 
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy 
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend 
Under thy own life's key.  Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech.  What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
'Tis an unseasoned courtier, good my lord,
Advise him. He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love. Heaven bless him!
Farewell, Bertram. The best wishes that can
Be forged in your thoughts be servants to you!
Be comfortable to my mother, your mistress,
And make much of her. Farewell, pretty lady,
You must hold the credit of your father.
O, were that all!  I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more 
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him. My imagination 
Carries no favor in't but Bertram's. 
I am undone, there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away.  'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me,
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour, to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart's table -- heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his reliques.  Who comes here?
One that goes with him.  I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, soly a coward; 
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place when virtue's steely bones 
Looks bleak i' th' cold wind.  Withal, full oft we see 
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
'Save you, fair queen! And you, monarch! No.
Are you meditating on virginity?
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear; 
His humble ambition, proud humility;
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet; 
His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world 
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he --
I know not what he shall -- God send him well!
The court's a learning place, and he is one --
What one, i' faith? That I wish well. 'Tis pity --
That wishing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
When he was retrograde, I think rather.
You go so much backward when you fight.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven.  The fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings 
To join like likes, and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those 
That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose 
What hath been cannot be.  Who ever strove
To show her merit, that did miss her love?
The King's disease -- my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed, and will not leave me.  
The Florentines and Senoys are by th' ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war. So 'tis reported, sir.
Nay, 'tis most credible; we here receive it
A certainty, vouched from our cousin Austria,
With caution, that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business, and would seem
To have us make denial. His love and wisdom,
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.  He hath armed our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes. 
Yet for our gentlemen that mean to see 
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part. It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit. What's he comes here?
It is the Count [Rossillion], my good lord,
Young Bertram. Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
Frank Nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too!  Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.
I would I had that corporal soundness now
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership! He did look far
Into the service of the time, and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on, 
And wore us out of act.  It much repairs me
To talk of your good father.  In his youth 
He had the wit which I can well observe 
today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honor.
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honor,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyed his hand. Who were below him
He used as creatures of another place,
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward. His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb.
So in approof lives not his epitaph
Would I were with him!  He would always say -- 
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words 
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them,
To grow there and to bear -- "Let me not live" --
This his good melancholy oft began,
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out -- "Let me not live," quoth he,
"After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
Expire before their fashions." This he wished.
I, after him, do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
To give some laborers room. You're loved, sir;
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, Count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed. Some six months since, my lord. 
If he were living, I would try him yet. --
Lend me an arm. -- The rest have worn me out 
With several applications. Nature and sickness 
Debate it at their leisure.  Welcome, Count,
My son's no dearer. Thank your Majesty.  
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
Get you gone, sir, I'll talk with you more anon. 
Even so it was with me when I was young.
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born.
It is the show and seal of nature's truth, 
Where love's strong passion is impressed in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone, 
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none. 
Her eye is sick on't; I observe her now.
What is your pleasure, madam? You know, Helen,
Mine honorable mistress. Nay, a mother,
Why not a mother? When I said "a mother,"
Methought you saw a serpent. What's in "mother,"
That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine.  'Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds.
You ne'er oppressed me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care.
God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother?  What's the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colored Iris, rounds thine eye?
-- Why, that you are my daughter?  That I am not.
I say I am your mother.  Pardon, madam; 
The Count Rossillion cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honored name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble.
My master, my dear lord he is, and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother. Nor I your mother?
You are my mother, madam; would you were --
So that my lord your son were not my brother --
Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister.  Can 't no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! "daughter" and "mother"
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catched your fondness!  Now I see
The myst'ry of your [loneliness], and find
Your salt tears' head, now to all sense 'tis gross: 
You love my son.  Invention is ashamed,
Against the proclamation of thy passion, 
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true, 
But tell me then 'tis so; for look, thy cheeks
Confess it, [t' one] to th' other, and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it. Only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear't; howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly. Good madam, pardon me!
Love you my son? Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about; my love hath in't a bond
Whereof the world takes note.  Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeached. Then I confess 
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven, 
My friends were poor, but honest, so's my love.
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me; I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still.  Thus Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more.  My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honor cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely, and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and Love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose 
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies, 
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies. 
Had you not lately an intent -- speak truly --
I will tell truth, by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willed me
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost. This was your motive
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King, 
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Happily been absent then.  But think you, Helen, 
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it?  He and his physicians
Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him,
They, that they cannot help.  How shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowelled of their doctrine, have left off
The danger to itself? There's something in't
More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th' luckiest stars in heaven, and would your honor
But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure
By such a day, an hour. Dost thou believe't?
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings 
To those of mine in court.  I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt. 
Be gone tomorrow, and be sure of this, 
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.  
Farewell, young lords, these warlike principles
Do not throw from you; and you, my lords, farewell.
Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all.
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received,
And is enough for both.  'Tis our hope, sir,
After well-ent'red soldiers, to return
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege.  Farewell, young lords,
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen. Let higher Italy
(Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy) see that you come 
Not to woo honor, but to wed it, when
The bravest questant shrinks.  Find what you seek, 
That fame may cry you loud.  I say farewell. 
Health, at your bidding, serve your Majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them.
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand. Beware of being captives
Before you serve. Our hearts receive your warnings.
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
'Tis not his fault, the spark. O, 'tis brave wars!
Most admirable!  I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with,
"Too young" and "the next year" and "'tis too early."
And thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry, 
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away. 
There's honor in the theft.  Commit it, Count.
I am your accessary, and so farewell.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
Farewell, captain. Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Noble heroes! my sword and yours are kin.
Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
Then here's a man stands that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneeled, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate,
And asked thee mercy for't. Good faith, across!
But, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cured
Of your infirmity? No. O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, and if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With spritely fire and motion, whose simple touch 
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand 
And write to her a love-line.  What her is this?
Why, Doctor She!  My lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her.  Now by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one, that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy, hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her --
For that is her demand -- and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me. Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond'ring how thou took'st it. Nay, I'll fit you,
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
Nay, come your ways. This haste hath wings indeed.
This is his Majesty, say your mind to him. 
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears. I am Cressid's uncle,
That dare leave two together;  fare you well.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
In what he did profess, well found. I knew him.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him,
Knowing him is enough. On's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me; chiefly one,
Which as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience th' only darling,
He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear.  I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause wherein the honor
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance, 
With all bound humbleness. We thank you, maiden, 
But may not be so credulous of cure, 
When our most learned doctors leave us, and
The congregated college have concluded
That laboring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate; I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one, to bear me back again.
I cannot give thee less, to be called grateful.
Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy. 
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister: 
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown, 
When judges have been babes; great floods have flown
From simple sources; and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises; and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest, and despair most [fits].
I must not hear thee; fare thee well, kind maid,
Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barred.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent,
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an imposture that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think, and think I know most sure, 
My art is not past power, nor you past cure.
Art thou so confident?  Within what space 
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar'st thou venter? Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame,
Traduced by odious ballads; my maiden's name
Seared otherwise; ne worse of worst -- extended
With vildest torture, let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak;
And what impossibility would slay 
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate 
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate: 
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite, or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practicer, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved. Not helping, death's my fee,
But if I help, what do you promise me?
Make thy demand. But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of [heaven].
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state; 
But such a one thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow. 
Here is my hand, the premises observed, 
Thy will by my performance shall be served.
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must --
Though more to know could not be more to trust --
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on, but rest
Unquestioned welcome and undoubted blest. --
Give me some help here ho! -- If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?
O Lord, sir! -- There's a simple putting off.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours that loves you.
O Lord, sir! -- Thick, thick, spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! -- Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipt, sir, as I think.
I play the noble huswife with the time,
To entertain it so merrily with a fool.
O Lord, sir! -- Why, there't serves well again.
Tend, sir; to your business:  give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back. 
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.  Not much commendation to them. 
Not much employment for you.  You understand me?
Most fruitfully, I am there before my legs.
To be relinquished of the artists --
So I say, both of Galen and Paracelsus.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows --
Right, so I say. That gave him out incurable -- 
Why, there 'tis, so say I too. Not to be helped -- 
Right. as 'twere a man assured of a -- 
Just, you say well; so would I have said.
That's it I would have said, the very same.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier.  'Fore me,
Go call before me all the lords in court.
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Fair maid, send forth thine eye.  This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make;
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress 
Fall, when Love please!  Marry, to each but one!
I'd give bay Curtal and his furniture, 
My mouth no more were broken than these boys', 
And writ as little beard. Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.
Heaven hath through me restored the King to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it your Majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
"We blush that thou shouldst choose; but be refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
We'll ne'er come there again." Make choice and see,
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream.  Sir, will you hear my suit?
And grant it.  Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
The honor, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threat'ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love!
No better, if you please. My wish receive,
Which great Love grant, and so I take my leave.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take,
I'll never do you wrong for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have
You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood. 
I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. -- This is the man.
Why then, young Bertram, take her, she's thy wife. 
My wife, my liege?  I shall beseech your Highness,
In such a business, give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes. Know'st thou not, Bertram,
What she has done for me? Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down 
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father's charge -- 
A poor physician's daughter my wife!  Disdain 
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her the which
I can build up.  Strange is it that our bloods,
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty.  If she be
All that is virtuous -- save what thou dislik'st,
A poor physician's daughter -- thou dislik'st
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place [when] virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer's deed.
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good alone
Is good, without a name; vileness is so:
The property by what [it] is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair,
In these to nature she's immediate heir;
And these breed honor.  That is honor's scorn,
Which challenges itself as honor's born, 
And is not like the sire.  Honors thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive 
Than our foregoers. The mere word's a slave 
Deboshed on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damned oblivion is the tomb
Of honored bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest.  Virtue and she
Is her own dower; honor and wealth from me.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do't.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad.
My honor's at the stake, which to defeat,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream,
We poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honor where 
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good; 
Believe not thy disdain, but presently 
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity.  Speak, thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the King, who so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so. Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine; to whom I promise
A counterpoise -- if not to thy estate
A balance more replete. I take her hand.
Good fortune and the favor of the King 
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief, 
And be performed tonight.  The solemn feast 
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends.  As thou lov'st her,
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.
Are you companion to the Count Rossillion?
To any count, to all counts: to what is man.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
Although, before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her. What, what, sweet heart?
O my Parolles, they have married me! 
I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits 
He wears his honor in a box unseen,
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable, we that dwell in't jades,
It shall be so. I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the King
That which I durst not speak.  His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike.  Wars is no strife
To the dark house and the [detested] wife.
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow. 
Why, these balls bound, there's noise in it. 'Tis hard!
A young man married is a man that's marred;
Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
The King has done you wrong; but hush,'tis so.
My mother greets me kindly.  Is she well?
She is not well, but yet she has her health.
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money,
I would she did as you say. Why, I say nothing.
A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight,
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge,
But puts it off to a compelled restraint;
Whose want, and whose delay, is strewed with sweets,
Which they distill now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy,
And pleasure drown the brim. What's his will else?
That you will take your instant leave a' th' King,
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strength'ned with what apology you think
May make it probable need. What more commands he?
That having this obtained, you presently
In every thing I wait upon his will. 
I shall report it so. I pray you. Come, sirrah.  
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
And by other warranted testimony.
Will she away tonight? As you'll have her.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the King, and have procured his leave
For present parting; only he desires
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled.  This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home, 
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better than they seem, 
And my appointments have in them a need 
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother.
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
But that I am your most obedient servant.
Come, come, no more of that. And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune. Let that go.
My haste is very great.  Farewell; hie home.
Pray, sir, your pardon. Well, what would you say?
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine; and yet it is;
But like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.  What would you have?
Something, and scarce so much; nothing indeed. 
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. 
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
I pray you stay not, but in haste to horse.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur? -- Farewell.
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after. Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace's part;  black and fearful 
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France 
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers. Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion, therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessed. Be it his pleasure.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic. Welcome shall they be;
And all the honors that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. -- You know your places well;
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
To fly the favors of so good a king
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprising of a maid too virtuous
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
We met him thitherward, for thence we came;
And after some dispatch in hand at court,
Look on his letter, madam, here's my passport.
Brought you this letter, gentlemen? Ay, madam,
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine, 
Thou robb'st me of a moi'ty. He was my son, 
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
Such is his noble purpose, and believe't,
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good convenience claims. Return you thither?
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
"Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France."
'Tis bitter. Find you that there? Ay, madam.
'Tis but the boldness of his hand haply,
Which his heart was not consenting to.
Nothing in France, until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord 
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly mistress.  Who was with him? 
A servant only, and a gentleman 
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement. Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
Which holds him much to have. Y' are welcome, gentlemen.
I will entreat you, when you see my son,
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honor that he loses.  More I'll entreat you
Written to bear along. We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
"Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France."
Nothing in France, until he has no wife! 
Thou shalt have none, Rossillion, none in France;
Then hast thou all again.  Poor lord, is't I 
That chase thee from thy country, and expose 
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war?  And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim, move the still-peering air
That sings with piercing, do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to't;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roared
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once.  No, come thou home, Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone.
My being here it is that holds thee hence. 
Shall I stay here to do't? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house, 
And angels officed all.  I will be gone, 
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come night, end day!
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll Steal away. 
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune. Sir, it is
A  charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard. Then go thou forth,
And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress! This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file;
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove 
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done
By sending me a letter? Read it again.
"I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
Ambitious love hath so in me offended
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war 
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far 
His name with zealous fervor sanctify. 
His taken labors bid him me forgive;
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
He is too good and fair for death and me,
Whom I myself embrace to set him free."
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so.  Had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented. Pardon me, madam,
If I had given you this at overnight,
She might have been o'erta'en; and yet she writes,
Pursuit would be but vain. What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband?  He cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath 
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife. 
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth, 
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return, and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love.  Which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Nay, come, for if they do approach the city,
Where do the palmers lodge,  I do beseech you?
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
Ay, marry, is't. Hark you, they come this way.
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself. Is it yourself?
I thank you and will stay upon your leisure.
You came I think from France? I did so. 
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.  His name, I pray you? 
The Count Rossillion. Know you such a one?
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him.
His face I know not. Whatsome'er he is,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?
Ay, surely, mere the truth, I know his lady.
There is a gentleman that serves the Count
Reports but coarsely of her. What's his name?
Monsieur Parolles. O, I believe with him.
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great Count himself,  she is too mean
To have her name repeated.  All her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined. Alas, poor lady,
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife 
I [warr'nt,] good creature, wheresoe'er she is, 
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleased. How do you mean?
May be the amorous Count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose. He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honor of a maid.
But she is armed for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defense. The gods forbid else!
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son,
That, Escalus. Which is the Frenchman? He,
That with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife.  If he were honester 
He were much goodlier.  Is't not a handsome gentleman?
'Tis pity he is not honest.  Yond's that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady,
I would poison that vile rascal. Which is he?
That jack-an-apes with scarfs.  Why is he melancholy?
Perchance he's hurt i' th' battle. Lose our drum!  Well.
He's shrewdly vexed at something. Look, he has spied us.
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
The troop is past.  Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host.  Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house. I humbly thank you. 
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight, the charge and thanking 
Shall be for me, and to requite you further, 
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Worthy the note. We'll take your offer kindly. 
I would have that drum or another, or 
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur.:
I must go look my twigs.  He shall be caught.
Your brother he shall go along with me.
As't please your lordship. I'll leave you.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The lass I spoke of.  But you say she's honest.
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once, 
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her, 
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters which she did re-send,
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature;
Will you go see her? With all my heart, my lord.  
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate befall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act. Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust, the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you Shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.  I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approves 
Y' are great in fortune.  Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay and pay again
When I have found it.  The Count he woos your daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
[Resolved] to carry her. Let her in fine consent,
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will nought deny
That She'll demand.  A ring the County wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents,
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice; yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after. Now I see
You See it lawful then. It is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won, 
Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time, 
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already. I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts, and songs composed
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on't. Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot, which if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
O, ransom, ransom!  Do not hide mine eyes.
I know you are the Muskos' regiment, 
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me,
And hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life. O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes; nay, I'll speak that
Go tell the Count Rossillion, and my brother,
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them. Captain, I will.
'A will betray us all unto ourselves:
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely locked.
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
No, my good lord, Diana. Titled goddess,
And worth it, with addition!  But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind, 
You are no maiden, but a monument.
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now; for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet Self was got. She then was honest. 
My mother did but duty, such, my lord, 
As you owe to your wife. No more a' that.
I prithee do not strive against my vows.
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service. Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you; but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
And mock us with our bareness. How have I sworn!
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the High'st to witness. Then pray you tell me,
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill?  This has no holding,
To swear by Him whom I protest to love
That I will work against Him; therefore your oaths 
Are words and poor conditions, but unsealed --
At least in my opinion.  Change it, change it! 
Be not so holy-cruel.  Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with.  Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love, as it begins, shall so persever.
I see that men make rope's in such a scarre,
That we'll forsake ourselves.  Give me that ring.
I'll lend it thee, my dear; but have no power
To give it from me. Will you not, my lord?
It is an honor 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Mine honor's such a ring,
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom 
Brings in the champion Honor on my part,
Against your vain assault.  Here, take my ring! 
My house, mine honor, yea, my life, be thine,
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window;
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be delivered;
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then, then fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sate in's heart.  She says all men 
Have the like oaths.  He had sworn to marry me 
When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried.  Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only in this disguise I think 't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
You have not given him his mother's letter?
I hear there is an overture of peace.
Nay, I assure you a peace concluded.
What will Count Rossillion do then?
Will he travel higher, or return again into France?
I will confess what I know without constraint. 
If ye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
I do not know if it be it or no.
Our interpreter does it well. Excellently.
"Dian, the Count's a fool, and full of gold" --
"When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
After he scores, he never pays the score.
Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before,
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
For count of this, the Count's a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear, Parolles."
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die.
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall.  Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this;  for it will come to pass
That every braggart Shall be found an ass.
Rust sword, cool blushes, and, Parolles, live
Safest in shame!  Being fooled, by fool'ry thrive!
There's place and means for every man alive.
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office,
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude 
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,
And answer thanks. I duly am informed 
His Grace is at Marsellis, to which place 
We have convenient convoy.  You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where heaven aiding,
And by the leave of my good lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome. Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome. Nor [you], mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labor 
To recompense your love.  Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower, 
As it hath fated her to be my motive 
And helper to a husband. But O, strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night; so lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away --
But more of this hereafter.  You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf. Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer. Yet, I pray you:
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp.  We must away:
Our waggon is prepared, and time revives us.
All's well that ends well! still the fine's the crown;
What e'er the course, the end is the renown.  
No, no, no, your son was misled with a
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs, 
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you.  In happy time!
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power.  God save you, sir.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
I do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful. What's your will?
To give this poor petition to the King,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence. The King's not here.
He hence removed last night, and with more haste 
Than is his use.  Lord, how we lose our pains!
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillion,
Whither I am going. I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame,
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means. This I'll do for you.
And you shall find yourself to be well thanked,
What e'er falls more. We must to horse again.
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
Foh, prithee stand away.  A paper from
O my good lord, you were the first that found me!
Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost thee.
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it; but your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home. 'Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done i' th' blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
O'erbears it, and burns on. My honored lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watched the time to shoot. This I must say --
But first I beg my pardon -- the young lord
Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady
Offense of mighty note; but to himself 
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey 
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive, 
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorned to serve
Humbly called mistress. Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear.  Well, call him hither,
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon,
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
Th' incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So 'tis our will he should. I shall, my liege.
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?
All that he is hath reference to your Highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame. He looks well on't. 
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail 
In me at once. But to the brightest beams 
Distracted clouds give way, so stand thou forth,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me. All is whole,
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of time
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color, or expressed it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came 
That she whom all men praised, and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye 
The dust that did offend it.  Well excused.
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
From the great compt; but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offense,
Crying,"That's good that's gone."  Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust;
Our own love waking cries to see what's done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage-day.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name 
Must be digested; give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter, 
That she may quickly come.   By my old beard,
And ev'ry hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead,
Was a sweet creature; such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger. Hers it was not.
Now pray you let me see it; for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to't.
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft to reave her
Of what should stead her most? My gracious sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers. Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her live's rate. I am sure I saw her wear it. 
You are deceived, my lord, she never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me, 
Wrapped in a paper, which contained the name 
Of her that threw it.  Noble she was, and thought
I stood engaged; but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune, and informed her fully
I could not answer in that course of honor
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the ring again. Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger,
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster. She never saw it. 
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honor, 
And mak'st [conjectural] fears to come into me, 
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman -- 'twill not prove so;
And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself could win me to believe,
More than to see this ring. Take him away.
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall [tax] my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little.  Away with him!
We'll sift this matter further. If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
I am wrapped in dismal thinkings. Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not.
Here's a petition from a Florentine, 
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it, 
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech 
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
Is here attending. Her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discov'ry.  Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the Count. 
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady, 
Was foully snatched.  Now, justice on the doers!
I wonder, sir, [sith] wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.  What woman's that?
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet.
My suit, as I do understand, you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honor
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
Come hither, Count, do you know these women?
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine, my lord.  If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine; 
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine; 
You give away myself, which is known mine;
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
That she which marries you must marry me,
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature,
Whom sometime I have laughed with. Let your Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them; fairer prove your honor
Than in my thought it lies. Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
What say'st thou to her? She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp. 
He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price. 
Do not believe him.  O, behold this ring, 
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel; yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner a' th' camp,
If I be one. He blushes, and 'tis hit.
Of six preceding ancestors, that gem,
Conferred by testament to th' Sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife, 
That ring's a thousand proofs. Methought you said 
You saw one here in court could witness it. 
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument. His name's Parolles.
I saw the man today, if man he be.
Find him, and bring him hither. What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots a' th' world taxed and deboshed,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
I think she has.  Certain it is I liked her,
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy, and in fine,
Her [inf'nite cunning,] with her modern grace,
Subdued me to her rate. She got the ring, 
And I had that which any inferior might
At market-price have bought.  I must be patient. 
You that have turned off a first so noble wife,
May justly diet me.  I pray you yet
(Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband)
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again. I have it not.
What ring was yours, I pray you? Sir, much like
Know you this ring?  This ring was his of late. 
And this was it I gave him, being a-bed.
The story then goes false, you threw it him
Out of a casement. I have spoke the truth.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly, every feather starts you.
Is this the man you speak of?  Ay, my lord.
Tell me, sirrah -- but tell me true, I charge  you, 
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off --
By him and by this woman here what know you?
This ring you say was yours? Ay, my good lord.
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
Who lent it you? It was not lent me neither.
Where did you find it then? I found it not. 
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
This ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.
It might be yours or hers for aught I know.
Take her away, I do not like her now,
To prison with her; and away with him.
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour. I'll never tell you.
Take her away. I'll put in bail, my liege.
I think thee now some common customer.
By Jove, if ever I knew man,'twas you.
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't;
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great King, I am no strumpet, by my life;
I am either maid, or else this old man's wife. 
She does abuse our ears. To prison with her! 
Good mother, fetch my bail.   Stay, royal sir.
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me.  But for this lord,
Who hath abused me, as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick.
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick --
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is't real that I see? No, my good lord,
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name, and not the thing. Both, both.  O, pardon!
O my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring, 
And look you, here's your letter.  This it says:
"When from my finger you can get this ring, 
And [are] by me with child, etc." This is done. 
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
O my dear mother, do I see you living?
Mine eyes smell onions, I shall weep anon.
Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
If thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower,
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress, more and less, 
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet, 
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet. 
The king's a beggar, now the play is done;
All is well ended, if this suit be won,
That you express content; which we will pay,
With strife to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts;
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
