<AYLVS. Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
Bear him away.  What is thy name, young man? 
Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir
I would thou hadst been son to some man else:
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured. Gentle cousin, 
Let us go thank him, and encourage him.
My father's rough and envious disposition 
Sticks me at heart.  Sir, you have well deserved. 
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy. Gentleman,
Wear this for me: one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.
Can I not say, I thank you?  My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere liveless block.
He calls us back.  My pride fell with my fortunes,
I'll ask him what he would.  Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrastled well, and overthrown
More than your enemies. Will you go, coz?
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? 
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference
O poor Orlando! thou art overthrown,
Or Charles, or something weaker, masters thee.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place.  Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous -- what he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke,
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the [smaller] is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished Duke, 
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves 
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters. 
But I can tell you that of late this Duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues,
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And on my life his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth.  Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you; fare you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
Why should I not?  Doth he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that, and do you love
Mistress dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court. Me, uncle? You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found 
So near our public court as twenty miles, 
Thou diest for it. I do beseech your Grace
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with myself I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires;
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic
(As I do trust I am not), then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness. Thus do all traitors:
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the [likelihood] depends.
Thou art thy father's daughter, there's enough.
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom,
So was I when your Highness banished him. 
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends, 
What's that to me? my father was no traitor. 
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake,
Else had she with her father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay,
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtile for thee, and her smoothness,
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool; she robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous 
When she is gone.  Then open not thy lips:
Firm and irrevocable is my doom 
Which I have passed upon her; she is banished. 
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege,
I cannot live out of her company.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself;
If you outstay the time, upon mine honor,
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers?  I will give thee mine.
I charge thee be not thou more grieved than I am.
I have more cause. Thou hast not, cousin,
Prithee be cheerful.  Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter? That he hath not.
No, hath not?  Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sund'red? shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly, 
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you, 
To bear your griefs yourself, and leave me out; 
For by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
The like do you. So shall we pass along
And never stir assailants. Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and -- in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will --
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances. 
What shall I call thee when thou art a man? 
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymed.
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
Leave me alone to woo him.  Let's away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go [we in] content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, 
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet 
Than that of painted pomp?  Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say,
"This is no flattery: these are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am."
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing. 
I would not change it. Happy is your Grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune 
Into so quiet and so sweet a style. 
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored. Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
today my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood,
To the which place a poor sequest'red stag,
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose 
In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques, 
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook, 
Augmenting it with tears. But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
"Poor deer," quoth he, "thou mak'st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
Left and abandoned of his velvet [friends]:
"'Tis right," quoth he,"thus misery doth part
The flux of company."  Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him.  "Ay," quoth Jaques,
"Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens,
'Tis just the fashion.  Wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of [the] country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we 
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up 
In their assigned and native dwelling-place. 
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer. Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be. Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
Saw her a-bed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft 
Your Grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
Hisperia, the princess' gentlewoman, 
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard 
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrastler
That did but lately foil the sinowy Charles,
And she believes, wherever they are gone,
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly;
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
What, my young master?  O my gentle master,
O my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland!  Why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous?  Why do people love you? 
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant? 
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny priser of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to [some] kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours.  Your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it! Why, what's the matter?
Come not within these doors!  Within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives.
Your brother -- no, no brother, yet the son
(Yet not the son, I will not call him son)
Of him I was about to call his father --
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off; 
I overheard him, and his practices.
This is no place, this house is but a butchery; 
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it. 
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?
Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do;
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age!  Here is the gold, 
All this I give you, let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty; 
For in my youth I never did apply 
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility;
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly.  Let me go with you,
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having.  It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content. 
Master, go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. 
From [seventeen] years till now almost fourscore 
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore it is too late a week;
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well, and not my master's debtor.
O Jupiter, how [weary] are my spirits!
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
I partly guess; for I have loved ere now.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine -- 
As sure I think did never man love so --
How many actions most ridiculous 
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy? 
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved. O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!
Alas, poor shepherd, searching of [thy wound],
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.
And mine, but it grows something stale with me.
I pray you, one of you question yond man,
If he for gold will give us any food;
I faint almost to death. Holla! you clown!
Peace, fool, he's not thy kinsman. Who calls?
Your betters, sir.  Else are they very wretched.
Peace, I say. Good even to [you], friend. 
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all. 
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here's a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succor. Fair sir, I pity her,
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
But I am shepherd to another man,
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition,
And little reaks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheep-cote now
By reason of his absence there is nothing
That you will feed on; but what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture? 
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile, 
That little cares for buying any thing. 
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages.  I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me; if you like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be,
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can no where find him like a man. 
My lord, he is but even now gone hence; 
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labor by his own approach.
Why, how now, monsieur, what a life is this,
That your poor friends must woo your company?
A fool, a fool!  I met a fool i' th' forest,
A motley fool.  A miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down, and basked him in the sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
"Good morrow, fool," quoth I.  "No, sir," quoth he,
"Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune."
And then he drew a dial from his poke, 
And looking on it, with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, "It is ten a' clock. 
Thus we may see," quoth he,"how the world wags. 
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven,
And so from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
And thereby hangs a tale."  When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep contemplative;
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool!  Motley's the only wear.
O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it; and in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
In mangled forms.  O that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat. 
Thou shalt have one. It is my only suit -- 
Provided that you weed your better judgments 
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise.  I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have;
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh.  And why, sir, must they so?
The why is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
[Not to] seem senseless of the bob; if not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley; give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the  foul body of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee!  I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin: 
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself, 
And all th' embossed sores, and headed evils, 
That thou with license of free foot hast caught,
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name,
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbor?
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
My tongue hath wronged him; if it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself.  If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild goose flies, 
Unclaimed of any man. But who [comes] here?
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
You touched my vein at first.  The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility; yet am I inland bred,
And know some nurture.  But forbear, I say,
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.
And you will not be answered with reason,
What would you have?  Your gentleness shall force,
More than your force move us to gentleness. 
I almost die for food, and let me have it.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all things had been savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern command'ment.  But what e'er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
If ever you have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sate at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear,
And know what 'tis to pity, and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men's feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engend'red;
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have 
That to your wanting may be minist'red.
Then but forbear your food a little while, 
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn, 
And give it food.  There is an old poor man,
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love; till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit. Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank ye, and be blest for your good comfort!
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
This wide and universal theatre
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in. All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages.  At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel 
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school.  And then the lover, 
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad 
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honor, sudden, and quick in quarrel,
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part.  The sixt age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound.  Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen, 
And let him feed.  I thank you most for him.
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
Welcome, fall to.  I will not trouble you
As yet to question you about your fortunes.
Give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither.  I am the Duke
That loved your father.  The residue of your fortune,
Go to my cave and tell me.  Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy [master] is.
Support him by the arm.  Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.  
Not see him since?  Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy, 
I should not seek an absent argument 
Of my revenge, thou present.  But look to it:
Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is;
Seek him with candle; bring him dead or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
O that your Highness knew my heart in this!
I never loved my brother in my life.
More villain thou.  Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love, 
And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey 
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
Shall see thy virtue witnessed every where.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.  
Here comes my sister reading, stand aside.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much. 
Love is merely a madness, and I tell you,
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.   Well; and what of him?
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you,
If you will mark it. O, come, let us remove,
Sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me, do not, Phebe;
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner;
I fly thee for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye:
'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murtherers!
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swound; why, now fall down, 
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murtherers! 
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee; 
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it; lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
If ever (as that ever may be near)
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love's keen arrows make. But till that time
Come not thou near me; and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why, I pray you?  Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched?  What though you have no beauty --
As, by my faith, I see no more in you 
Than without candle may go dark to bed -- 
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature's sale-work.  'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favored children.
'Tis not her glass, but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
But, mistress, know yourself, down on your knees,
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love;
For I must tell you friendly in your ear, 
Sell when you can, you are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer; 
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. 
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together,
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine,
'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
Will you go, sister?  Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud; though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
"Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?,' 
Sweet Phebe -- Hah! what say'st thou, Silvius? 
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Where ever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love, your sorrow and my grief
Hast my love; is not that neighborly?
I would have you. Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love,
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure; and I'll employ thee too.
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then 
A scatt'red smile, and that I'll live upon.
Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me yerwhile?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him;
'Tis but a peevish boy -- yet he talks well --
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth -- not very pretty --
But sure he's proud -- and yet his pride becomes him.
He'll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offense, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall -- yet for his years he's tall;
His leg is but so so -- and yet 'tis well;
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mixed in his cheek; 'twas just the difference
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near 
To fall in love with him; but for my part
I love him not, nor hate him not; and yet 
Have more cause to hate him than to love him, 
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And, now I am rememb'red, scorned at me.
I marvel why I answered not again.
But that's all one; omittance is no quittance.
I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it; wilt thou, Silvius?
Phebe, with all my heart. I'll write it straight;
The matter's in my head and in my heart.
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
They say you are a melancholy fellow. 
My gentle Phebe did bid me give you this.
I know not the contents, but as I guess
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenure. Pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Patience herself would startle at this letter,
And play the swaggerer: bear this, bear all!
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as phoenix.  'Od's my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt;
Why writes she so to me?  Well, shepherd, well, 
This is a letter of your own device.
No, I protest, I know not the contents, 
Phebe did write it.  Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand, she has a leathern hand,
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands;
She has a huswife's hand -- but that's no matter.
I say she never did invent this letter,
This is a man's invention and his hand.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers. Why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian.  Women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words,  blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance.  Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet;
Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
She Phebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.
Good morrow, fair ones.  Pray you (if you know)
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheep-cote fenced about with olive-trees?
West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom,
rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself,
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Such garments and such years.  "The boy is fair, 
Of female favor, and bestows himself
And browner than her brother." Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin.  Are you he?
I am.  What must we understand by this?
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained. I pray you tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo what befell! He threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself
Under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity: 
A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair, 
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head nimble in threats approached
The opening of his mouth; but suddenly
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself,
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush, under which bush's shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with cat-like watch
When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men. And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But to Orlando: did he leave him there, 
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back, and purposed so; 
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge, 
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him, in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother? Was't you he rescued?
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
'Twas I; but 'tis not I.  I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin? By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that desert place --
[In] brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love,
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm 
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted, 
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind. 
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin,
Dyed in blood, unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why, how now, Ganymed, sweet Ganymed?
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymed!
Look, he recovers. I would I were at home.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Be of good cheer, youth.  You a man?
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness, 
To show the letter that I writ to you. 
I care not if I have. It is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd --
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
It is to be all made of faith and service,
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion, and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience, 
All purity, all trial, all observance;
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Why do you speak too, "Why blame you me to love you?"
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you no more of this, 'tis like the howling
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised? 
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear. 
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say you will have her, when I bring her.
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say you'll marry me, if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
You say that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even: 
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter; 
You, yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter;
Keep you your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd;
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her
If she refuse me; and from hence I go
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter's favor.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
I'll have no father, if you be not he;
I'll have no husband, if you be not he; 
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she. 
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot 
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here, and put him to the sword; 
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came; 
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to [them] again
That were with him exiled.  This to be true,
I do engage my life. Welcome, young man;
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot;
And after, every of this happy number,
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us,
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Mean time, forget this new-fall'n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music, and you brides and bridegrooms all, 
With measure heaped in joy, to th' measures fall.
Sir, by your patience. -- If I heard you rightly, 
The Duke hath put on a religious life, 
And thrown into neglect the pompous court?
To him will I.  Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
You to your former honor I bequeath,
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it;
You to a love, that your true faith doth merit;
You to your land, and love, and great allies;
You to a long and well-deserved bed;
And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled. -- So to your pleasures,
I am for other than for dancing measures.
To see no pastime I.  What you would have
I'll stay to know at your abandoned cave.
Proceed, proceed. We'll begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights. 
