<CYMVS> You do not meet a man but frowns. Our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers'
Still seem as does the King's. But what's the matter?
His daughter, and the heir of 's kingdom (whom
He purposed to his wive's sole son -- a widow
That late he married), hath referred herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman. She's wedded, 
Her husband banished, she imprisoned: all
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King 
Be touched at very heart. None but the King?
He that hath lost her too; so is the Queen,
That most desired the match. But not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at. And why so?
He that hath missed the Princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report; and he that hath her
(I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banished) is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he. You speak him far.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly. What's his name and birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: his father 
Was called Sicilius, who did join his honor 
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with glory and admired success:
So gained the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had (besides this gentleman in question)
Two other sons, who in the wars o' th' time
Died with their swords in hand; for which their father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being, and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman, our theme, deceased
As he was born. The King he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bedchamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of, which he took,
As we do air, fast as 'twas minist'red,
And in's spring became a harvest; lived in court
(Which rare it is to do) most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest, to th' more mature
A glass that feated them, and to the graver 
A child that guided dotards. To his mistress
(For whom he now is banished), her own price 
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his virtue 
By her election may be truly read,
What kind of man he is. I honor him
Even out of your report. But pray you tell me,
Is she sole child to th' King? His only child.
He had two sons (if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it), the eldest of them at three years old,
I' th' swathing clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went. How long is this ago?
That a king's children should be so conveyed,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,
That could not race them! Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at,
Yet is it true, sir. I do well believe you.
We must forbear. Here comes the gentleman, 
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you. You're my prisoner, but
Your jailer shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win th' offended King,
I will be known your advocate. Marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
You leaned unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you. Please your Highness,
I will from hence today. You know the peril.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barred affections, though the King
Hath charged you should not speak together. O 
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband, 
I something fear my father's wrath, but nothing 
(Always reserved my holy duty) what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live,
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again. My queen, my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyall'st husband that did e'er plight troth.
My residence in Rome at one [Philario's],
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter; thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall. Be brief, I pray you. 
If the King come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure. Yet I'll move him 
To walk this way. I never do him wrong
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends;
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love,
This diamond was my mother's. Take it, heart,
But keep it till you woo another wife,
When Imogen is dead. How, how? another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And cere up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death! Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on. And sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles 
I still win of you. For my sake wear this:
It is a manacle of love, I'll place it 
Upon this fairest prisoner. O the gods!
When shall we see again? Alack, the King!
Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest. Away!
Thou'rt poison to my blood. The gods protect you,
And bless the good remainders of the court!
I am gone. There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is. O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
A year's age on me. I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation, 
I am senseless of your wrath; a touch more rare 
Subdues all pangs, all fears. Past grace? obedience?
Past hope, and in despair, that way past grace.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
O blessed, that I might not! I chose an eagle,
Thou took'st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne
A seat for baseness. No, I rather added
A lustre to it. O thou vild one! Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman; overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays. What? art thou mad?
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were
A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus 
Our neighbor shepherd's son! Thou foolish thing!
They were again together; you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up. Beseech your patience. Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some comfort
Out of your best advice. Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day, and being aged
Die of this folly! Fie, you must give way.
Here is your servant. How now, sir? What news? 
My lord your son drew on my master. Hah? 
No harm, I trust, is done? There might have been,
But that my master rather played than fought
And had no help of anger. They were parted
By gentlemen at hand. I am very glad on't.
Your son's my father's friend, he takes his part
To draw upon an exile. O brave sir!
I would they were in Afric both together,
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back. Why came you from your master?
On his command. He would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven; left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to,
When't pleased you to employ me. This hath been
Your faithful servant. I dare lay mine honor
He will remain so. I humbly thank your Highness.
Pray walk awhile. About some half hour hence,
Pray you speak with me. You shall, at least, 
Go see my lord aboard. For this time leave me. 
No, faith; not so much as his patience.
No, but he fled forward still, toward your face. 
I would they had not come between us.
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' th' haven,
And questionedst very sail. If he should write
And I not have it 'twere a paper lost
As offered mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee? It was his queen, his queen!
Then waved his handkerchief? And kissed it, madam.
Senseless linen, happier therein than I!
And that was all? No, madam; for so long 
As he could make me with [this] eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep 
The deck, with glove or hat or handkerchief 
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of's mind
Could best express how slow his soul sailed on,
How swift his ship. Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him. Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eye-strings, cracked them, but
To look upon him, till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle;
Nay, followed him till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
Have turned mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him? Be assured, madam,
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say. Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours 
Such thoughts and such; or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray 
Mine interest and his honor; or have charged him, 
At the sixt hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
T' encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
The Queen, madam, Desires your Highness' company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched,
I will attend the Queen. Madam, I shall. 
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
She holds her virtue still, and I my mind.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it.
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers;
Make haste. Who has the note of them? I, madam.
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs? 
Pleaseth your Highness, ay. Here they are, madam. 
But I beseech your Grace, without offense
(My conscience bids me ask), wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds,
Which are the movers of a languishing death,
But though slow, deadly. I wonder, doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learned me how
To make perfumes? distill? preserve? yea so,
That our great King himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded
(Unless thou think'st me devilish) is't not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging (but none human),
To try the vigor of them, and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather 
Their several virtues and effects. Your Highness 
Shall from this practice but make hard your heart; 
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious. O, content thee.
Here comes a flattering rascal, upon him
Will I first work. He's for his master,
And enemy to my son. -- How now, Pisanio?
Doctor, your service for this time is ended,
Take your own way. I do suspect you, madam,
But you shall do no harm. Hark thee, a word.
I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange ling'ring poisons. I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
A drug of such damned nature. Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile, 
Which first (perchance) she'll prove on cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher; but there is 
No danger in what show of death it makes, 
More than the locking up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect; and I the truer,
Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench, and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work.
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master -- greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is. To shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect 
To be depender on a thing that leans?
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends 
So much as but to prop him? Thou tak'st up
Thou know'st not what; but take it for thy labor.
It is a thing I made, which hath the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee take it,
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her; do't as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still; to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I'll move the King
To any shape of thy preferment, such
As thou'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words. A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master,
And the remembrancer of her to hold 
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her 
Of liegers for her sweet; and which she after, 
Except she bend her humor, shall be assured
To taste of too. So, so. Well done, well done.
The violets, cowslips, and the primeroses,
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio;
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
I'll choke myself. There's all I'll do for you. 
A father cruel, and a step-dame false,
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady 
That hath her husband banished. O, that husband!
My supreme crown of grief, and those repeated 
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n, 
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
Is the [desire] that's glorious. Blessed be those,
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my lord with letters. Change you, madam:
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your Highness dearly. Thanks, good sir,
All of her that is out of door most rich!
If she be furnished with a mind so rare,
She is alone th' Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend;
Arm me audacity from head to foot, 
Or like the Parthian I shall flying fight --
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by th' rest -- and take it thankfully.
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do. Thanks, fairest lady.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery orbs above, and the twinned stones
Upon the numbered beach, and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
'Twixt fair and foul? What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i' th' eye: for apes and monkeys
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way, and 
Contemn with mows the other; nor i' th' judgment:
For idiots in this case of favor would 
Be wisely definite; nor i' th' appetite: 
Sluttery, to such neat excellence opposed,
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
What is the matter, trow? The cloyed will --
Both filled and running -- ravening first the lamb,
Longs after for the garbage. What, dear sir,
Desire my man's abode where I did leave him:
He's strange and peevish. I was going, sir,
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is. 
Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome. He is called 
The Britain reveller. When he was here,
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Not knowing why. I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur that it seems much loves
A Gallian girl at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Britain
(Your lord, I mean) laughs from's free lungs; cries "O,
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
By history, report, or his own proof,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will's free hours languish for
Assured bondage?" Will my lord say so?
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter.
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But heavens know 
Some men are much to blame. Not he, I hope. 
Not he; but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much;
In you, which I account his, beyond all talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too. What do you pity, sir?
Two creatures heartily. Am I one, sir?
You look on me; what wrack discern you in me 
Deserves your pity? Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun, and solace
I' th' dungeon by a snuff! I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
(I was about to say) enjoy your -- But
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on't. You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you --
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do; for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born -- discover to me
What both you spur and stop. Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch
(Whose every touch) would force the feeler's soul 
To th' oath of loyalty; this object, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye, 
Firing it only here; should I (damned then) 
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood (falsehood, as
With labor); then by-peeping in an eye
Base and illustrious as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking tallow: it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt. My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain. And himself. Not I
Inclined to this intelligence pronounce
The beggary of his change; but 'tis your graces
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out. Let me hear no more.
O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart
With pity that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fastened to an empery 
Would make the great'st king double -- to be partnered
With tomboys hired with that self exhibition 
Which your own coffers yield; with diseased ventures 
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature; such boiled stuff
As well might poison poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock. Revenged?
How should I be revenged? If this be true
(As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse), if it be true,
How should I be revenged? Should he make me
Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse -- revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure. What ho, Pisanio!
Let me my service tender on your lips. 
Away, I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honorable, 
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not 
For such an end thou seek'st -- as base as strange.
Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far
From thy report as thou from honor, and
Solicits here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio!
The King my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault. If he shall think it fit
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew, and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all. What ho, Pisanio!
O happy Leonatus! I may say,
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long,
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country called his; and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this to know if your affiance 
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord,
That which he is, new o'er; and he is one 
The truest mannered, such a holy witch 
That he enchants societies into him;
Half all [men's] hearts are his. You make amends.
He sits 'mongst men like a [descended] god;
He hath a kind of honor sets him off,
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty Princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honored with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err. The love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you
(Unlike all others) chaffless. Pray your pardon.
All's well, sir. Take my pow'r i' th' court for yours.
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
T' entreat your Grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns:
Your lord, myself, and other noble friends
Are partners in the business. Pray, what is't?
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord 
(The best feather of our wing) have mingled suns 
To buy a present for the Emperor;
Which I (the factor for the rest) have done
In France. 'Tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form, their values great,
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage. May it please you
To take them in protection? Willingly;
And pawn mine honor for their safety. Since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber. They are in a trunk,
Attended by my men. I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night;
I must aboard tomorrow. O no, no.
Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word
By length'ning my return. From Gallia
I crossed the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your Grace. I thank you for your pains:
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, do't tonight.
I have outstood my time, which is material
To th' tender of our present. I will write.
Send your trunk to me, it shall safe be kept,
And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that 
Bears all down with her brain, and this her son 
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor Princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame governed,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce he'ld make. The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honor; keep unshaked
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
I' enjoy thy banished lord and this great land! 
Who's there? My woman? Helen? Please you, madam. 
What hour is it? Almost midnight, madam. 
I have read three hours then. Mine eyes are weak.
Fold down the leaf where I have left. To bed.
Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
And if thou canst awake by four o' th' clock,
I prithee call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly.
To your protection I commend me, gods,
From fairies and the tempters of the night
The crickets sing, and man's o'erlabored sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes ere he wakened
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becom'st thy bed! fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
But kiss, one kiss! Rubies unparagoned,
How dearly they do't! 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus. The flame o' th' taper 
Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids,
To see th' enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure laced
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design!
To note the chamber, I will write all down:
Such and such pictures; there the window; such
Th' adornment of her bed; the arras, figures, 
Why, such and such; and the contents o' th' story. 
Ah, but some natural notes about her body,
Above ten thousand meaner moveables
Would testify, t' enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her,
And be her sense but as a monument,
Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off,;
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
'Tis mine, and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the conscience does within,
To th' madding of her lord. On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I' th' bottom of a cowslip. Here's a voucher,
Stronger than ever law could make; this secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock and ta'en
The treasure of her honor. No more: to what end?
Why should I write this down that's riveted,
Screwed to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turned down
Where Philomele gave up. I have enough; 
To th' trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning 
May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear; 
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
It would make any man cold to lose.
The exile of her minion is too new,
She hath not yet forgot him. Some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on't,
And then she's yours. You are most bound to th' King,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself 
To orderly [solicits], and be friended
With aptness of the season; make denials 
Increase your services; so seem as if 
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless. Senseless? not so.
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius. A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that's no fault of his. We must receive him
According to the honor of his sender,
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice. Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the Queen and us; we shall have need
T' employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream. By your leave ho! 
I know her women are about her; what
If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
Which buys admittance (oft it doth), yea, and makes
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to th' stand o' th' stealer; and 'tis gold
Which makes the true man killed and saves the thief;
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man. What
Can it not do, and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
Who's there that knocks? A gentleman. No more?
Yes, and a gentlewoman's son. That's more
Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours, 
Can justly boast of. What's your lordship's pleasure?
Your lady's person. Is she ready? Ay, 
To keep her chamber. There is gold for you,
How, my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good? -- The Princess.
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweethand. 
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too muchpains
For purchasing but trouble. The thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks,
And scarce can spare them. Still I swear I love you.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me.
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not. This is no answer. 
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you spare me. Faith, 
I shall unfold equal discourtesy 
To your best kindness; one of your great knowing
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin;
Fools are not mad folks. Do you call me fool?
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad;
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners
By being so verbal; and learn now, for all,
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce
By th' very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity
To accuse myself I hate you; which I had rather
You felt than make't my boast. You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
One bred of alms and fostered with cold dishes, 
With scraps o, th, court, it is no contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties 
(Yet who than he more mean?) to knit their souls 
(On whom there is no more dependancy
But brats and beggary) in self-figured knot,
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement by
The consequence o' th' crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it with a base slave,
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
A pantler -- not so eminent. Profane fellow!
Wert thou the son of Jupiter, and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom. Thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Comparative for your virtues, to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
For being preferred so well. The south-fog rot him!
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His mean'st garment
That ever hath but clipt his body, is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee, 
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio?
"His garment,? I am sprited with a fool,
Frighted, and ang'red worse. Go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm. It was thy master's. Shrew me
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king's in Europe! I do think
I saw't this morning; confident I am,
Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kissed it:
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he. 'Twill not be lost.
I hope so; go and search. You have abused me.
"His meanest garment"? Ay, I said so, sir;
If you will make't an action, call witness to't. 
I will inform your father. Your mother too. 
She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope, 
But the worst of me. So I leave [you,] sir,
To th, worst of discontent. I'll be revenged.
Fear it not, sir. I would I were so sure
To win the King as I am bold her honor
Will remain hers. What means do you make to him?
Not any; but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
That warmer days would come. In these feared [hopes]
I barely gratify your love; they failing,
Your very goodness and your company 
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king
Hath heard of great Augustus. Caius Lucius 
Will do's commission throughly. And I think 
He'll grant the tribute, send th' arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief. I do believe
(Statist though I am none, nor like to be)
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legion now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more ordered than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline
(Now wing-led with their courages) will make known
To their approvers they are people such 
That mend upon the world. See! Jachimo!
The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
And winds of all the corners kissed your sails,
To make your vessel nimble. Welcome, sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return. Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon.
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look thorough a casement to allure false hearts,
And be false with them. Here are letters for you.
Their tenure good, I trust. 'Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
When you were there? He was expected then,
Sparkles this stone as it was wont, or is't not 
Too dull for your good wearing? If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
I'll make a journey twice as far, t' enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stone's too hard to come by. Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy. Make [not], sir,
Your loss your sport. hope you know that we
Must not continue friends. Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honor,
Together with your ring; and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills. If you can make't apparent 
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours; if not, the foul opinion 
You had of her pure honor gains or loses 
Your sword or mine, or masterless leave both
To who shall find them. Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath, which I doubt not
You'll give me leave to spare when you shall find
You need it not. Proceed. First, her bedchamber
(Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching), it was hanged
With tapestry of silk and silver; the story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cydnus swelled above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride. A piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value, which I wondered
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
Since the true life on't was -- This is true;
And this you might have heard of here, by me, 
Or by some other. More particulars
Must justify my knowledge. So they must,
Or do your honor injury. The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing. Never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves. The cutter
Was as another Nature, dumb; outwent her,
Motion and breath left out. This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of. The roof o' th' chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted. Her and irons
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands. This is her honor!
Let it be granted you have seen all this (and praise 
Be given to your remembrance), the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves 
The wager you have laid. Then if you can
Be pale, I beg but leave to air this jewel. See!
And now 'tis up again. It must be married
To that your diamond, I'll keep them. Jove --
Once more let me behold it. Is it that
Which I left with her? Sir (I thank her), that.
She stripped it from her arm. I see her yet:
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
And yet enriched it too. She gave it me, and said
She prized it once. May be she plucked it off
To send it me. She writes so to you? doth she?
O no, no, no, 'tis true. Here, take this too,
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honor 
Where there is beauty; truth, where semblance; love,
Where there's another man. The vows of women 
Of no more bondage be to where they are made 
Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
O, above measure false! Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again, 'tis not yet won.
It may be probable she lost it; or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted,
And so I hope he came by't. Back my ring!
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
More evident than this; for this was stol'n.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears.
'Tis true -- nay, keep the ring -- 'tis true. I am sure
She would not lose it. Her attendants are
All sworn and honorable. They induced to steal it?
And by a stranger? No, he hath enjoyed her.
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this. She hath bought the name of whore thus dearly.
There, take thy hire, and all the fiends of hell 
Divide themselves between you! Sir, be patient. 
This is not strong enough to be believed 
Of one persuaded well of. Never talk on't:
She hath been colted by him. If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast
(Worthy her pressing) lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging. By my life,
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her? Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it. Will you hear more?
Spare your arithmetic, never count the turns.
Once, and a million! I'll be sworn. No swearing:
If you will swear you have not done,t, you lie,
And I will kill thee if thou dost deny 
Thou'st made me cuckold. I'll deny nothing. 
O that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal! 
I will go there and do't, i' th' court, before
Her father. I'll do something -- Quite besides
The government of patience! You have won.
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself. With all my heart. 
Is there no way for men to be, but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father, was I know not where
When I was stamped. Some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seemed
The Dian of that time. So doth my wife 
The nonpareil of this. O vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained, 
And prayed me oft forbearance; did it with 
A pudency so rosy the sweet view on't
Might well have warmed old Saturn; that I thought her
As chaste as unsunned snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Jachimo, in an hour -- was't not? --
Or less -- at first? Perchance he spoke not, but
Like a full-acorned boar, a German [one],
Cried "O!" and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman's part in me -- for there's no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all;
They are not constant, but are changing still: 
One vice but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them, 
Detest them, curse them; yet 'tis greater skill 
In a true hate, to pray they have their will:
The very devils cannot plague them better. 
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar (whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes, and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever) was in this Britain,
And conquered it, Cassibelan, thine uncle
(Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it), for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which, by thee, lately 
Is left untendered. And to kill the marvel, 
Shall be so ever. There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Julius. Britain's a world
By itself, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses. That opportunity
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With oaks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
But suck them up to th' topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of "Came, and saw and overcame." With shame
(The first that ever touched him) he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping
(Poor ignorant baubles!) on our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, cracked
As easily 'gainst our rocks. For joy whereof 
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point
(O giglet Fortune!) to master Caesar's sword, 
Made Lud's-Town with rejoicing fires bright, 
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free. Caesar's ambition,
Which swelled so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' th' world, against all color here
Did put the yoke upon's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be. We do say then to Caesar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordained our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled, whose repair and franchise
Shall (by the power we hold) be our good deed,
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown and called
Himself a king. I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar 
(Caesar, that hath moe kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers) thine enemy. 
Receive it from me then: war and confusion 
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee; look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself. Thou art welcome, Caius.
Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him I gathered honor,
Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
Behooves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms, a president
Which not to read would show the Britains cold.
So Caesar shall not find them. Let proof speak.
I know your master's pleasure and he mine:
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monsters her accuse? Leonatus!
O master, what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian
(As poisonous tongued as handed) hath prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She's punished for her truth, and undergoes,
More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master,
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How? that I should murther her,
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I, her? Her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I 
That I should seem to lack humanity
So much as this fact comes to? "Do't; the letter 
That I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity." O damned paper,
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st
So virgin-like without? Lo here she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
Who, thy lord? That is my lord Leonatus?
O, learned indeed were that astronomer
That knew the stars as I his characters;
He'ld lay the future open. You good gods,
Let what is here contained relish of love,
Of my lord's health, of his content -- yet not
That we two are asunder; let that grieve him:
Some griefs are med'cinable, that is one of them,
For it doth physic love -- of his content, 
All but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be
You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers 
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike; 
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, gods
O for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Haven. Read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,
Who long'st like me to see thy lord; who long'st
(O let me bate!) -- but not like me -- yet long'st,
But in a fainter kind -- O, not like me,
For mine's beyond beyond -- say, and speak thick
(Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing, 
To th' smothering of the sense), how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by th' way 
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as 
T' inherit such a haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence; and for the gap
That we shall make in time, from our hence-going
And our return, to excuse. But first, how get hence.
Why should excuse be born or ere begot?
We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many [score] of miles may we well rid
'Twixt hour and hour? One score 'twixt sun and sun,
Madam, 's enough for you -- and too much too.
Why, one that rode to's execution, man,
Could never go so slow. I have heard of riding wagers,
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
That run i' th' clock's behalf. But this is fool'ry.
Go, bid my woman feign a sickness, say
She'll home to her father; and provide me presently
A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit
A franklin's huswife. Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me, man; nor here, [nor] here, 
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee, 
Do as I bid thee. There's no more to say: 
Accessible is none but Milford way. 
A goodly day not to keep house with such
Whose roof's as low as ours! [Stoop,] boys, this gate
Instructs you how t' adore the heavens, and bows you
To a morning's holy office. The gates of monarchs
Are arched so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbands on without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
We house i' th' rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do. Hail, heaven! Hail, heaven!
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill, 
Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a crow, 
That it is place which lessens and sets off, 
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
This service is not service, so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus
Draws us a profit from all things we see;
And often, to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
Than is the full-winged eagle. O, this life
Is nobler than attending for a check;
Richer than doing nothing for a [bable];
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine,
Yet keeps his book uncrossed. No life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak; we poor unfledged
Have never winged from view o' th' nest, nor [know] not
What air's from home. Happ'ly this life is best,
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you 
That have a sharper known; well corresponding
With your stiff age; but unto us it is 
A cell of ignorance, travelling a-bed, 
A prison, or a debtor that not dares
To stride a limit. What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.
We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat;
Our valor is to chase what flies. Our cage
We make a choir, as doth the prisoned bird,
And sing our bondage freely. How you speak!
Did you but know the city's usuries,
And felt them knowingly; the art o' th' court,
As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slipp'ry that
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' th' war,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
I' th' name of fame and honor which dies i' th' search, 
And hath as oft a sland'rous epitaph
As record of fair act; nay, many times 
Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse, 
Must curtsy at the censure. O boys, this story
The world may read in me: my body's marked
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off. Then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit; but in one night,
A storm or robbery (call it what you will)
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather. Uncertain favor!
My fault being nothing (as I have told you oft)
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevailed
Before my perfect honor, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans. So
Followed my banishment, and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all 
The fore-end of my time. But up to th' mountains!
This is not hunters' language. He that strikes 
The venison first shall be the lord o' th' feast, 
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to th' King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine, and though trained up thus meanly
I, th' cave [wherein they] bow, their thoughts do hit
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
In simple and low things to prince it much
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his father called Guiderius -- Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story; say, "Thus mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on's neck," even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture 
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure 
Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more 
His own conceiving. -- Hark, the game is roused! --
O Cymbeline, heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me; whereon,
At three and two years old, I stole these babes,
Thinking to bar thee of succession, as
Thou refts me of my lands. Euriphile,
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honor to her grave.
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan called,
They take for natural father. -- The game is up. 
Thou toldst me, when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand. Ne'er longed my mother so
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man! 
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh 
From th' inward of thee? One but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond self-explication. Put thyself
Into a havior of less fear, ere wilderness
Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me with
A look untender? If't be summer news,
Smile to't before; if winterly, thou need'st
But keep that count'nance still. My husband's hand!
That drug-damned Italy hath outcraftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak man, thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me. Please you read,
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
What shall I need to draw my sword, the paper
Hath cut her throat already! No, 'tis slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?
False to his bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry myself awake? That's false to's bed? is it?
I false? Thy conscience witness! Jachimo, 
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
Thou then lookedst like a villain; now methinks 
Thy favor's good enough. Some jay of Italy 
(Whose mother was her painting) hath betrayed him.
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
And for I am richer than to hang by th' walls,
I must be ripped. To pieces with me! O!
Men's vows are women's traitors. All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villainy; not born where't grows,
But worn a bait for ladies. Good madam, hear me.
True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false; and Sinon's weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail. -- Come, fellow, be thou honest,
Do thou thy master's bidding. When thou seest him,
A little witness my obedience. Look 
I draw the sword myself, take it, and hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart. 
Fear not, 'tis empty of all things but grief. 
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding, strike.
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause,
But now thou seem'st a coward. Hence, vile instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand. Why, I must die;
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart:
Something's [afore't]. Soft, soft, we'll no defense,
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turned to heresy? Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers. Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe. And thou, Posthumus, 
That didst set up my disobedience 'gainst the King
My father, and [make] me put into contempt the suits 
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find 
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of rareness; and I grieve myself
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Will then be panged by me. Prithee dispatch,
The lamb entreats the butcher. Where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding
When I desire it too. O gracious lady!
Since I received command to do this business
I have not slept one wink. Do't, and to bed then.
I'll wake mine eyeballs [out] first. Wherefore then
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretense? this place?
Mine action? and thine own? our horses' labor?
The time inviting thee? the perturbed court
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far, 
To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand,
Th' elected deer before thee? But to win time 
To lose so bad employment, in the which
I have considered of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience. Talk thy tongue weary, speak.
I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear,
Therein false strook, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak. Then, madam,
I thought you would not back again. Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me. Not so, neither;
But if I were as wise as honest, then
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
But that my master is abused. Some villain,
Ay, and singular in his art, hath done you both
Some Roman courtezan? No, on my life.
I'll give but notice you are dead, and send him 
Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded
I should do so. You shall be missed at court, 
And that will well confirm it. Why, good fellow,
What shall I do the while? where bide? how live?
Or in my life what comfort, when I am
Dead to my husband? If you'll back to th' court --
No court, no father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me
As fearful as a siege. If not at court,
Then not in Britain must you bide. Where then?
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? day? night?
Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in't;
In a great pool a swan's nest. Prithee think
There's livers out of Britain. I am most glad
You think of other place. Th' ambassador,
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven 
tomorrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise 
That which, t' appear itself, must not yet be 
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view; yea, happily, near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear
As truly as he moves. O, for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on't,
I would adventure. Well then, here's the point:
You must forget to be a woman; change
Command into obedience; fear and niceness
(The handmaids of all women, or more truly
Woman it pretty self) into a waggish courage,
Ready in gibes, quick-answered, saucy, and
As quarrellous as the weasel; nay, you must
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
Exposing it (but O, the harder heart!
Alack, no remedy!) to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget 
Your laborsome and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Juno angry. Nay, be brief: 
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already. First, make yourself but like one.
Forethinking this, I have already fit
('Tis in my cloak-bag) doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them. Would you in their serving
(And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season) 'fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
Wherein you're happy, which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in music, doubtless
With joy he will embrace you; for he's honorable,
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad --
You have me, rich, and I will never fail
Beginning nor supplyment. Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with. Prithee away,
There's more to be considered; but we'll even
All that good time will give us. This attempt
I am soldier to, and will abide it with 
A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell, 
Lest being missed, I be suspected of 
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Here is a box, I had it from the Queen,
What's in't is precious. If you are sick at sea,
Or stomach-qualmed at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Direct you to the best! Amen! I thank thee.
Thus far, and so farewell. Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote I must from hence,
And am right sorry that I must report ye
My master's enemy. Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself 
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs 
Appear unkinglike. So, sir. I desire of you
A conduct overland to Milford-Haven.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you!
My lords, you are appointed for that office;
The due of honor in no point omit.
So farewell, noble Lucius. Your hand, my lord.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy. Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have crossed the Severn. Happiness!
He goes hence frowning; but it honors us
That we have given him cause. 'Tis all the better,
Your valiant Britains have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor 
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness. 
The pow'rs that he already hath in Gallia 
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain. 'Tis not sleepy business,
But must be looked to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tendered
The duty of the day. She [looks] us like
A thin more made of malice than of duty,
We have noted it. Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance. Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
'Tis time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her. She's a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are [strokes],
And strokes death to her. Where is she, sir? How
Can her contempt be answered? Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all locked, and there's no answer
That will be given to th' loud of noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer. This
She wished me to make known; but our great court
Made me to blame in memory. Her doors locked?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
Prove false! Son, I say, follow the King.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
I have not seen these two days. Go, look after. 
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus! 
He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that; for he believes 
It is a thing most precious. But for her, 
Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seized her;
Or winged with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus. Gone she is
To death or to dishonor, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British crown.
How now, my son? 'Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the King, he rages, none
Dare come about him. All the better. May
This night forestall him of the coming day!
I love and hate her; for she's fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman, from every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded, 
Outsells them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me and throwing favors on 
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment 
That what's else rare is choked; and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For when fools shall --
Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither. Ah, you precious pandar! Villain,
Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends. O, good my lord!
Where is thy lady? or, by Jupiter,
I will not ask again. Close villain,
I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn. Alas, my lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome. Where is she, sir? Come nearer.
No farther halting. Satisfy me home, 
O, my all-worthy lord! All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is, at once,
At the next word. No more of "worthy lord"!
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death. Then, sir:
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight. Let's see't. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus' throne. Or this, or perish.
She's far enough, and what he learns by this
May prove his travel, not her danger. Humh!
I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Thou bid'st me to my loss; for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed
Be crossed with slowness; labor be his meed. 
I see a man's life is a tedious one,
I have tired myself; and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
When from the mountain top Pisanio showed thee,
Thou wast within a ken. O Jove, I think 
Foundations fly the wretched: such, I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me 
I could not miss my way. Will poor folks lie, 
That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder,
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fullness
Is sorer than to lie for need; and falsehood
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord,
Thou art one o' th' false ones. Now I think on thee,
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
Here is a path to't; 'tis some savage hold.
I were best not call; I dare not call; yet famine,
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty and peace breeds cowards; hardness ever
Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who's here?
If any thing that's civil, speak; if savage,
Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I'll enter.
Best draw my sword; and if mine enemy
But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
You, Polydore, have proved best woodman, and 
Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I 
Will play the cook and servant, 'tis our match.
The sweat of industry would dry and die,
But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs
Will make what's homely savory; weariness
Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep'st thyself! I am throughly weary.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
There is cold meat i' th' cave, we'll browse on that
Whilst what we have killed be cooked. Stay, come not in.
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy. What's the matter, sir?
By Jupiter, an angel! or if not,
An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
Before I entered here I called, and thought
To have begged or bought what I have took. Good troth,
I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found 
Gold strewed i' th' floor. Here's money for my meat,
I would have left it on the board so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted with
Pray'rs for the provider. Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
As 'tis no better reckoned, but of those
Who worship dirty gods. I see you're angry.
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it. Whither bound?
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
Is bound for Italy; he embarked at Milford;
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall'n in this offense. Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls; nor measure our good minds 
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered!
'Tis almost night, you shall have better cheer 
Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it. 
Boys, bid him welcome. Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard but be your groom in honesty:
He is a man, I'll love him as my brother.
And such a welcome as I'ld give to him
After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome!
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends. 'Mongst friends?
If brothers: would it had been so, that they
Had been my father's sons, then had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee, Posthumus. He wrings at some distress.
Would I could free't! Or I, what e'er it be,
What pain it cost, what danger. Gods! Hark, boys. 
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
That did attend themselves and had the virtue 
Which their own conscience sealed them, laying by 
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
Could not outpeer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
I'ld change my sex to be companion with them,
Since Leonatus' false. It shall be so.
Boys, we'll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in.
Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supped,
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
So far as thou wilt speak it. Pray draw near.
The night to th' owl and morn to th' lark less welcome.
This is the tenor of the Emperor's writ:
That since the common men are now in action 
'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians, 
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Full weak to undertake our wars against
The fall'n-off Britains, that we do incite
The gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius proconsul; and to you the tribunes,
For this immediate levy, he commands
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!
Is Lucius general of the forces? Ay.
Remaining now in Gallia? With those legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be supplyant. The words of your commission
Will tie you to the numbers and the time
Of their dispatch. We will discharge our duty. 
You are not well. Remain here in the cave,
We'll come to you after hunting. Brother, stay here.
Are we not brothers? So man and man should be,
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting, I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick. So please you, leave me, 
Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me 
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort 
To one not sociable. I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you trust me here,
I'll rob none but myself, and let me die,
Stealing so poorly. I love thee; I have spoke it;
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
As I do love my father. What? how? how?
If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
In my good brother's fault. I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say,
Love's reason's without reason. The bier at door,
And a demand who is't shall die, I'ld say
"My father, not this youth." O noble strain!
O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness!
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base:
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
I'm not their father, yet who this should be
Doth miracle itself, loved before me. -- 
'Tis the ninth hour o' th' morn. Brother, farewell. 
I wish ye sport. You health. So please you, sir.
These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies I have heard!
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court.
Experience, O, thou disprov'st report!
Th' imperious seas breeds monsters; for the dish,
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still, heart-sick. Pisanio,
I'll now taste of thy drug. I could not stir him.
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me; yet said hereafter
I might know more. To th' field, to th' field!
We'll leave you for this time, go in, and rest.
We'll not be long away. Pray, be not sick
For you must be our huswife.Well or ill,
I am bound to you. And shalt be ever. 
This youth, how e'er distressed, appears he ha
Good ancestors. How angel-like he sings!
But his neat cookery! he cut our roots in characters,
And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick
And he her dieter. Nobly he yokes
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
Was that it was for not being such a smile;
The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly
From so divine a temple to commix
With winds that sailors rail at. I do note
That grief and patience, rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together. Grow [patience],
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine.
It is great morning. Come away! -- Who's there?
I cannot find those runagates, that villain
Hath mocked me. I am faint. "Those runagates"?
Means he not us? I partly know him, tis
Cloten, the son o' th' Queen. I fear some ambush.
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know 'tis he. We are held as outlaws. Hence!
He is but one. You and my brother search
What companies are near. Pray you away,
Let me alone with him. Soft, what are you
That fly me thus? Some villain mountainers?
I have heard of such. What slave art thou? A thing
More slavish did I ne'er than answering
A slave without a knock. Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain. Yield thee, thief. 
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I 
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big? 
Thy words I grant are bigger; for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art;
Why I should yield to thee. Thou villain base,
Who is thy grandfather! he made those clothes,
Which (as it seems) make thee. Thou precious varlet,
My tailor made them not. Hence then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool,
I am loath to beat thee. Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble. What's thy name?
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
'Twould move me sooner. To thy further fear, 
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know 
I am son to th' Queen. I am sorry for't; not seeming
So worthy as thy birth. Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence, those I fear -- the wise:
At fools I laugh, not fear them. Die the death!
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
I'll follow those that even now fled hence,
And on the gates of Lud's-Town set your heads.
Yield, rustic mountaineer. No company's abroad?
None in the World. You did mistake him sure.
I cannot tell; long is it since I saw him,
But time hath nothing blurred those lines of favor
Which then he wore. The snatches in his voice,
'Twas very Cloten. In this place we left them. 
I wish my brother make good time with him, 
You say he is so fell. Being scarce made up,
I mean, to man, he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors; for defect of judgment
Is oft the cause of fear. But see, thy brother.
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse,
There was no money in't. Not Hercules
Could have knocked out his brains, for he had none.
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
My head as I do his. What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
Son to the Queen (after his own report),
Who called me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he'ld take us in,
Displace our heads where (thanks, [ye] gods!) they grow,
And set them on Lud's-Town. We are all undone. 
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose,
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Protects not us; then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law? What company
Discover you abroad? No single soul
Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants. Though his [humor]
Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that
From one bad thing to worse, not frenzy, not
Absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone; although perhaps
It may be heard at court that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing
(As it is like him), might break out and swear
He'ld fetch us in; yet is't not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking, 
Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail 
More perilous than the head. Let ord'nance
Come as the gods foresay it; howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well. I had no mind
To hunt this day; the boy Fidele's sickness
Did make my way long forth. With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him. I'll throw't into the creek
Behind our rock, and let it to the sea,
And tell the fishes he's the Queen's son, Cloten.
That's all I reak. I fear 'twill be revenged.
Would, Polydore, thou hadst not done't! though valor
Becomes thee well enough. Would I had done't!
So the revenge alone pursued me. Polydore,
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robbed me of this deed. I would revenges, 
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through 
And put us to our answer. Well, 'tis done.
We'll hunt no more today, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee to our rock,
You and Fidele play the cooks. I'll stay
Till hasty Polydore return, and bring him
To dinner presently. Poor sick Fidele!
I'll willingly to him. To gain his color
I'ld let a parish of such Clotens blood,
And praise myself for charity. O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rud'st wind
That by the top doth take the mountain pine
And make him stoop to th' vale. 'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearned, honor untaught, 
Civility not seen from other, valor
That wildly grows in them but yields a crop 
As if it had been sowed. Yet still it's strange 
What Cloten's being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us. Where's my brother?
I have sent Cloten's clotpole down the stream
In embassy to his mother. His body's hostage
For his return. My ingenious instrument
(Hark, Polydore), it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
Is he at home? He went hence even now.
What does he mean? Since death of my dear'st mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing, and lamenting toys,
Is jollity for apes, and grief for boys. 
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
Of what we blame him for. The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipped from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turned my leaping time into a crutch,
Than have seen this. O sweetest, fairest lily!
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
As when thou grew'st thyself. O melancholy,
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish [crare]
Mightst easil'est harbor in? Thou blessed thing,
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy.
Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber, 
Not as death's dart being laughed at; his right cheek 
Reposing on a cushion. Where? O' th' floor,;
His arms thus leagued. I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud. Why, he but sleeps!
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed.
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted,
And worms will not come to thee. With fairest flowers
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
I'll sweeten thy sad grave. Thou shalt not lack
The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose, nor
The azured harebell, like thy veins; no, nor
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,
Outsweet'ned not thy breath. The raddock would,
With charitable bill (O bill, sore shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument!), bring thee all this, 
Yea, and furred moss besides. When flow'rs are none,
To winter-ground thy corse -- Prithee have done, 
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
And not protract with admiration what
Is now due debt. To th' grave! Say, where shall's lay him?
By good Euriphile, our mother. Be't so;
And let us, Polydore, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th' ground,
As once to our mother; use like note and words,
Save that Euriphile must be Fidele. Cadwal,
I cannot sing. I'll weep, and word it with thee;
For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse
Than priests and fanes that lie. We'll speak it then.
Great griefs, I see, med'cine the less; for Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys,
And though he came our enemy, remember 
He was paid for that. Though mean and mighty, rotting 
Together, have one dust, yet reverence 
(That angel of the world) doth make distinction
Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely,
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince. Pray you fetch him hither.
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax',
When neither are alive. If you'll go fetch him,
We'll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to th' east,
My father hath a reason for't. 'Tis true.
Come on then, and remove him. So. Begin.
We have done our obsequies. Come lay him down.
Here's a few flow'rs, but 'bout midnight, more:
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces.
You were as flow'rs, now withered; even so
These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.
Come on, away, apart upon our knees.
The ground that gave them first has them again:
Their pleasures here are past, so [is] their pain.
Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven, which is the way?
I thank you. By yond bush? Pray how far thither?
'Od's pittikins! can it be six mile yet?
I have gone all night. Faith, I'll lie down and sleep.
But soft! no bedfellow! O gods and goddesses! 
These flow'rs are like the pleasures of the world;
This bloody man, the care on't. I hope I dream; 
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper, 
And cook to honest creatures. But 'tis not so.
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes. Our very eyes
Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith,
I tremble still with fear; but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren's eye, feared gods, a part of it!
The dream's here still; even when I wake, it is
Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt. 
A headless man? The garments of Posthumus?
I know the shape of's leg; this is his hand, 
His foot Mercurial, his Martial thigh, 
The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face --
Murther in heaven? How? 'Tis gone. Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Conspired with that irregulous devil Cloten,
Hath here cut off my lord. To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous! Damned Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters (damned Pisanio!)
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Strook the main-top! O Posthumus, alas,
Where is thy head? Where's that? Ay me! where's that?
Pisanio might have killed thee at the heart
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
'Tis he and Cloten. Malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murd'rous to th' senses? That confirms it home.
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten. O! 
Give color to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those 
Which chance to find us. O, my lord! my lord! 
To them the legions garrisoned in Gallia,
After your will, have crossed the sea, attending
You here at Milford-Haven with your ships.
They are here in readiness. But what from Rome?
The Senate hath stirred up the confiners
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits
That promise noble service; and they come
Under the conduct of bold Jachimo,
Sienna's brother. When expect you them?
With the next benefit o' th' wind. This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be mustered; bid the captains look to't. Now, sir,
What have you dreamed of late of this war's purpose? 
Last night the very gods showed me avision 
(I fast and prayed for their intelligence) thus: 
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, winged
From the spungy south to this part of the west,
There vanished in the sunbeams, which portends
(Unless my sins abuse my divination)
Success to th' Roman host. Dream often so,
And never false. Soft ho, what trunk is here?
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
It was a worthy building. How? a page?
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather;
For nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
Let's see the boy's face. He's alive, my lord.
He'll then instruct us of this body. Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou mak'st thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
That (otherwise than noble nature did) 
Hath altered that good picture? What's thy interest
In this sad wrack? How came't? Who is t? 
What art thou? I am nothing; or if not,
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
A very valiant Britain, and a good,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas,
There is no more such masters. I may wander
From east to occident, cry out for service,
Try many, all good; serve truly; never
Find such another master. 'Lack, good youth!
Thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding. Say his name, good friend.
Richard du Champ. If I do lie and do
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
They'll pardon it. -- Say you, sir? Thy name? Fidele, sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same;
Thy name well fits thy faith; thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well mastered, but be sure 
No less beloved. The Roman Emperor's letters,
Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner 
Than thine own worth prefer thee. Go with me. 
I'll follow, sir. But first, and't please the gods,
I'll hide my master from the flies, as deep
As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha' strewed his grave,
And on it said a century of prayers
(Such as I can) twice o'er, I'll weep and sigh,
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me. Ay, good youth,
And rather father thee than master thee.
The boy hath taught us manly duties. Let us
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
A grave. Come, arm him. Boy, he's preferred
By thee to us, and he shall be interred
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes:
Some falls are means the happier to arise. 
Again; and bring me word how 'tis with her.
A fever with the absence of her son;
A madness, of which her life's in danger. Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
So needful for this present! It strikes me, past
The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure, and
Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
By a sharp torture. Sir, my life is yours,
I humbly set it at your will; but, for my mistress,
I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your 
Hold me your loyal servant. Good my liege, 
The day that she was missing he was here;
I dare be bound he's true and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will, no doubt, be found. The time is troublesome.
We'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy
Does yet depend. So please your Majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen, by the Senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amazed with matter. Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of. Come more, for more you're ready;
The want is but to put those pow'rs in motion 
That long to move. I thank you. Let's withdraw, 
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not 
What can from Italy annoy us, but
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain. 'Tis strange.
Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betide to Cloten, but remain
Perplexed in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false, I am honest; not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them.
All other doubts, by time let them be cleared,
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steered.
The noise is round about us. Let us from it. 
What pleasure, sir, [find we] in life, to lock it
From action and adventure? Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way, the Romans
Must or for Britains slay us or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
During their use, and slay us after. Sons,
We'll higher to the mountains, there secure us.
To the King's party there's no going. Newness
Of Cloten's death (we being not known, not mustered
Among the bands) may drive us to a render
Where we have lived, and so extort from's that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with torture. This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becoming you,
Nor satisfying us. It is not likely
That when they hear their Roman horses neigh, 
Behold their quartered fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloyed importantly as now, 
That they will waste their time upon our note, 
To know from whence we are. O, I am known
Of many in the army. Many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
From my remembrance. And besides, the King
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves,
Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
The certainty of this hard life, aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your cradle promised,
But to be still hot summer's tanlings and
The shrinking slaves of winter. Than be so,
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to th' army.
I and my brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be questioned. By this sun that shines,
I'll thither. What thing is't that I never
Did see man die, scarce ever looked on blood,
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison! 
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel 
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed 
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown. By heavens, I'll go.
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
I'll take the better care; but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
The hands of Romans! So say I, amen.
No reason I, since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation, should reserve
My cracked one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed too, lads, and there I'll lie.
Lead, lead! The time seems long, their blood thinks scorn
Till it fly out and show them princes born. 
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wished
Thou shouldst be colored thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murther wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio,
Every good servant does not all commands;
No bond, but to do just ones. Gods, if you
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never 
Had lived to put on this; so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and strook 
Me, wretch, more worth your vengeance. But alack, 
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love,
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.
But Imogen is your own, do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey. I am brought hither
Among th' Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady's kingdom. 'Tis enough
That, Britain, I have killed thy mistress; peace,
I'll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose: I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
As does a Britain peasant; so I'll fight
Against the part I come with; so I'll die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death; and thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I'll dedicate. Let me make men know
More valor in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o' th' Leonati in me! 
To shame the guise o' th' world, I will begin
The fashion: less without and more within. 
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood. I have belied a lady,
The Princess of this country; and the air on't
Revengingly enfeebles me, or could this carl,
A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me
In my profession? Knighthoods and honors, borne
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn.
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods. 
Stand, stand! we have th' advantage of the ground,
The lane is guarded. Nothing routs us but
The villainy of our fears. Stand, stand, and fight!
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;
For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
As war were hoodwinked. 'Tis their fresh supplies.
It is a day turned strangely. Or betimes
Cam'st thou from where they made the stand? I did,
Though you it seems come from the fliers? I did.
No blame be to you, sir, for all was lost
But that the heavens fought; the King himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britains seen, all flying
Through a strait lane; the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaught'ring -- having work
More plentiful than tools to do't -- strook down
Some mortally, some slightly touched, some falling
Merely through fear, that the strait pass was
With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living
To die with length'ned shame. Where was this lane?
Close by the battle, ditched, and walled with turf, 
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier
(An honest one, I warrant), who deserved 
So long a breeding as his white beard came to, 
In doing this for 's country. Athwart the lane,
He, with two striplings (lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter,
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased, or shame),
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled,
"Our Britain's harts die flying, not our men.
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand,
Or we are Romans and will give you that
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown. Stand, stand!" These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many --
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing -- with this word "Stand, stand!"
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turned
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks;
Part shame, part spirit renewed, that some, turned coward
But by example (O, a sin in war, 
Damned in the first beginners!), gan to look
The way that they did, and to grin like lions 
upon the pikes o' th' hunters. Then began 
A stop i' th' chaser; a retire; anon
A rout, confusion thick. Forthwith they fly
Chickens, the way which they [stooped] eagles; slaves,
The strides [they] victors made: and now our cowards,
Like fragments in hard voyages, became
The life o' th' need. Having found the back door open
Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound
Some slain before, some dying, some their friends
O'erborne i' th' former wave. Ten chased by one
Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty.
Those that would die or ere resist are grown
The mortal bugs o' th' field. his was strange chance.
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys!
Nay, do not wonder at it; you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon't,
And vent it for a mock'ry? Here is one:
"Two boys, an old man (twice a boy), a lane,
Preserved the Britains, was the Romans' bane." 
Nay, be not angry, sir. 'Lack, to what end? 
Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend; 
For if he'll do as he is made to do,
I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into rhyme. Farewell, you're angry. 
Still going? This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i' th' field, and ask "what news?" of me!
today how many would have given their honors
To have saved their carcasses! took heel to do't,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charmed,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he strook. Being an ugly monster,
'Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds,
Sweet words; or hath moe ministers than we
That draw his knives i' th' war. Well, I will find him;
For being now a favorer to the Britain,
No more a Britain, I have resumed again
The part I came in. Fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is 
Here made by th' Roman; great the answer be
Britains must take. For me, my ransom's death. 
On either side I come to spend my breath; 
Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.
Great Jupiter be praised! Lucius is taken.
'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
That gave th' affront with them. So 'tis reported;
But none of'em can be found. Stand! who's there?
Who had not now been drooping here, if seconds
Had answered him. Lay hands on him; a dog!
A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
What crows have pecked them here. He brags his service
As if he were of note. Bring him to th' King.
You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you;
So graze, as you find pasture. Ay, or a stomach. 
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art a way,
I think, to liberty; yet am I better
Than one that's sick o' th' gout, since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured
By th' sure physician, death, who is the key
T' unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fettered
More than my shanks and wrists. You good gods, give me
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt, 
Then free for ever! Is't enough I am sorry?
So children temporal fathers do appease; 
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent, 
I cannot do it better than in gyves,
Desired more than constrained. To satisfy,
If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me than my all.
I know you are more clement than vild men,
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
A sixt, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement. That's not my desire.
For Imogen's dear life take mine, and though
'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coined it.
'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake;
You rather, mine being yours; and so, great pow'rs,
If you will take this audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen,
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts
Accuse the Thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of flow'rs.
Be not with mortal accidents oppressed, 
No care of yours it is, you know 'tis ours.
Whom best I love, I cross; to make my gift, 
The more delayed, delighted. Be content, 
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift.
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reigned at his birth, and in
Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade.
He shall be lord of Lady Imogen,
And happier much by his affliction made.
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine,
And so away! No farther with your din
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline. 
He came in thunder, his celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell; the holy eagle
Stooped, as to foot us. His ascension is
More sweet than our blest fields. His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleased. Thanks, Jupiter!
The marble pavement closes, he is entered 
His radiant roof. Away, and, to be blest,
Let us with care perform his great behest. 
Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire and begot
A father to me; and thou hast created
A mother and two brothers. But (O scorn!)
Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born.
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
On greatness' favor dream as I have done,
Wake, and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve.
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steeped in favors; so am I,
That have this golden chance and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one,
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers! Let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers,
'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing,
Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast
Stepped before targes of proof, cannot be found.
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our grace can make him so. I never saw
Such noble fury in so poor a thing;
Such precious deeds in one that promised nought
But beggary and poor looks. No tidings of him? 
He hath been searched among the dead and living; 
But no trace of him. To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward, which I will add
To you, the liver, heart, and brain of Britain,
By whom, I grant, she lives. 'Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it. Sir,
In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen.
Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
Unless I add, we are honest. Bow your knees.
Arise my knights o' th' battle. I create you
Companions to our person, and will fit you
With dignities becoming your estates.
There's business in these faces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? You look like Romans,
And not o' th' court of Britain. Hail, great King!
To sour your happiness, I must report 
The Queen is dead. Who worse than a physician
Would this report become? But I consider,
By med'cine life may be prolonged, yet death
Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which (being cruel to the world) concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confessed
I will report, so please you. These her women
Can trip me, if I err, who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finished. Prithee say.
First, she confessed she never loved you; only
Affected greatness got by you, not you;
Married your royalty, was wife to your place,
Abhorred your person. She alone knew this;
And but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess 
Was as a scorpion to her sight, whose life,
But that her flight prevented it, she had 
Ta'en off by poison. O most delicate fiend!
Who is't can read a woman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal mineral, which, being took,
Should by the minute feed on life, and ling'ring,
By inches waste you. In which time she purposed,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
O'ercome you with her show, and in time
(When she had fitted you with her craft) to work
Her son into th' adoption of the crown;
But failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless desperate; opened (in despite
Of heaven and men) her purposes; repented
The evils she hatched were not effected; so
Despairing died. Heard you all this, her women?
We did, so please your Highness. Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
Mine ears, that [heard] her flattery, nor my heart, 
That thought her like her seeming. It had been vicious
To have mistrusted her; yet, O my daughter,
That it was folly in me, thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!
Thou com'st not, Caius, now for tribute; that
The Britains have rased out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one, whose kinsmen have made suit
That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter
Of you their captives, which ourself have granted;
Consider, sir, the chance of war, the day
Was yours by accident. Had it gone with us,
We should not, when the blood was cool, have threatened
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be called ransom, let it come. Sufficeth
A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer.
Augustus lives to think on't; and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
I will entreat: my boy, a Britain born,
Let him be ransomed. Never master had
A page so kind, so duteous, diligent, 
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so nurse-like. Let his virtue join 
With my request, which I'll make bold your Highness 
Cannot deny. He hath done no Britain harm,
Though he have served a Roman. Save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside. I have surely seen him;
His favor is familiar to me. Boy,
Thou hast looked thyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say "Live, boy." Ne'er thank thy master. Live;
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it;
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
The noblest ta'en. I humbly thank your Highness.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad,
And yet I know thou wilt. No, no, alack,
There's other work in hand. I see a thing
Bitter to me as death; your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself. The boy disdains me, 
He leaves me, scorns me. Briefly die their joys
That place them on the truth of girls and boys. 
Why stands he so perplexed? What wouldst thou, boy?
I love thee more and more; think more and more
What's best to ask. Know'st him thou look'st on? Speak,
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?
He is a Roman, no more kin to me
Than I to your Highness; who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer. Wherefore ey'st him so?
I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please
To give me hearing. Ay, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Fidele, sir. Thou'rt my good youth -- my page;
I'll be thy master. Walk with me; speak freely.
Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad 
Who died, and was Fidele. What think you?
Peace, peace, see further. He eyes us not, forbear.
Creatures may be alike; were't he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us. But we [saw] him dead.
Be silent; let's see further. It is my mistress.
Since she is living, let the time run on
To good or bad. Come, stand thou by our side,
Make thy demand aloud. Sir, step you forth;
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely,
Or by our greatness, and the grace of it
(Which is our honor), bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood. -- [On,] speak to him.
My boon is, that this gentleman may render
Of whom he had this ring. What's that to him? 
Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that 
Which, to be spoke, would torture thee. How? me?
I am glad to be constrained to utter that
Which torments me to conceal. By villainy
I got this ring. 'Twas Leonatus, jewel,
Whom thou didst banish; and -- which more may grieve thee,
As it doth me -- a nobler sir ne'er lived
'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord?
For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits
Quail to remember -- Give me leave, I faint.
My daughter? what of her? Renew thy strength;
I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will
Than die ere I hear more. Strive, man, and speak.
Upon a time -- unhappy was the clock
That strook the hour! -- it was in Rome -- accursed 
The mansion where! -- 'twas at a feast -- O would
Our viands had been poisoned, or at least 
Those which I heaved to head! -- the good Posthumus 
(What should I say? He was too good to be
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
Amongst the rar'st of good ones), sitting sadly
Hearing us praise our loves of Italy
For beauty that made barren the swelled boast
Of him that best could speak; for feature, laming
The shrine of Venus or straight-pight Minerva,
Postures beyond brief nature; for condition,
A shop of all the qualities that man
Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving,
Fairness which strikes the eye -- I stand on fire:
Come to the matter. All too soon I shall,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
Most like a noble lord in love and one
That had a royal lover, took his hint,
And (not dispraising whom we praised; therein
He was as calm as virtue) he began
His mistress' picture, which by his tongue being made, 
And then a mind put in't, either our brags
Were craked of kitchen trulls, or his description 
Proved us unspeaking sots. Nay, nay, to th' purpose.
Your daughter's chastity -- there it begins.
He spake of her, as Dian had hot dreams,
And she alone were cold; whereat I, wretch,
Made scruple of his praise, and wagered with him
Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore
Upon his honored finger, to attain
In suit the place of's bed and win this ring
By hers and mine adultery. He, true knight,
No lesser of her honor confident
Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring,
And would so, had it been a carbuncle
Of Phoebus' wheel; and might so safely, had it
Been all the worth of's car. Away to Britain
Post I in this design. Well may you, sir,
Remember me at court, where I was taught
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
'Twixt amorous and villainous. Being thus quenched
Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain
Gan in your duller Britain operate 
Most vildly; for my vantage, excellent;
And to be brief, my practice so prevailed, 
That I returned with simular proof enough 
To make the noble Leonatus mad,
By wounding his belief in her renown
With tokens thus, and thus; averring notes
Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet
(O cunning, how I got['t]!), nay; some marks
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of chastity quite cracked,
I having ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon --
Methinks I see him now -- Ay, so thou dost,
Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool,
Egregious murtherer, thief, any thing
That's due to all the villains past, in being,
To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer! Thou, King, send out
For torturers ingenious; it is I
That all th' abhorred things o' th' earth amend
By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
That killed thy daughter -- villain-like, I lie --
That caused a lesser villain than myself, 
A sacrilegious thief, to do't. The temple
Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself. 
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set 
The dogs o' th' street to bay me; every villain
Be called Posthumus Leonatus, and
Be villainy less than 'twas! O Imogen!
My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen! Peace, my lord, hear, hear --
Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
There lie thy part. O gentlemen, help
Mine and your mistress! O my Lord Posthumus,
You ne'er killed Imogen till now! Help, help!
Mine honored lady! Does the world go round?
How comes these staggers on me? Wake, my mistress!
If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me
To death with mortal joy. How fares my mistress?
Thou gav'st me poison. Dangerous fellow, hence!
Breathe not where princes are. The tune of Imogen! 
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if
That box I gave you was not thought by me
A precious thing. I had it from the Queen.
New matter still. It poisoned me. O gods!
I left out one thing which the Queen confessed,
Which must approve thee honest. "If Pisanio
Have," said she, "given his mistress that confection
Which I gave him for cordial, she is served
As I would serve a rat." What's this, Cornelius?
The Queen, sir very oft importuned me
To temper poisons for her, still pretending
The satisfaction of her knowledge only
In killing creatures vild, as cats and dogs
Of no esteem. I, dreading that her purpose
Was of more danger, did compound for her
A certain stuff, which, being ta'en, would cease 
The present pow'r of life, but in short time
All offices of nature should again 
Do their due functions. Have you ta'en of it? 
Most like I did, for I was dead. My boys,
There was our error. This is sure Fidele.
Why did you throw your wedded lady [from] you?
Think that you are upon a rock, and now
Throw me again. Hang there like fruit, my soul,
Till the tree die! How now, my flesh? my child?
What, mak'st thou me a dullard in this act?
Wilt thou not speak to me? Your blessing, sir.
Though you did love this youth, I blame ye not,
You had a motive for't. My tears that fall
Prove holy water on thee! Imogen,
Thy mother's dead. I am sorry for't, my lord.
O, she was naught; and long of her it was 
That we meet here so strangely; but her son 
Is gone, we know not how, nor where. My lord,
Now fear is from me, I'll speak troth. Lord Cloten,
Upon my lady's missing, came to me
With his sword drawn, foamed at the mouth, and swore,
If I discovered not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death. By accident
I had a feigned letter of my master's
Then in my pocket, which directed him
To seek her on the mountains near to Milford,
Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments
(Which he enforced from me), away he posts
With unchaste purpose, and with oath to violate
My lady's honor. What became of him
I further know not. Let me end the story:
I slew him there. Marry, the gods forefend!
I would not thy good deeds should from my lips 
Pluck a hard sentence. Prithee, valiant youth,
Deny't again. I have spoke it, and I did it. 
A most incivil one. The wrongs he did me
Were nothing prince-like; for he did provoke me
With language that would make me spurn the sea
If it could so roar to me. I cut off's head,
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine. I am sorrow for thee;
By thine own tongue thou art condemned, and must
Endure our law. Thou'rt dead. That headless man
I thought had been my lord. Bind the offender,
And take him from our presence. Stay, sir King.
This man is better than the man he slew,
As well descended as thyself, and hath
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
Had ever scar for. Let his arms alone,
They were not born for bondage. Why, old soldier:
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for, 
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent 
As good as we? In that he spake too far.
And thou shalt die for't. We will die all three
But I will prove that two on's are as good
As I have given out him. My sons, I must
For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech,
Though haply well for you. Your danger's ours.
And our good his. Have at it then, by leave:
Thou hadst, great King, a subject who
Was called Belarius. What of him? He is
A banished traitor. He it is that hath
Assumed this age: indeed a banished man,
I know not how a traitor. Take him hence,
The whole world shall not save him. Not too hot.
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons, 
And let it be confiscate all, so soon 
As I have received it. Nursing of my sons?
I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee.
Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons;
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen, that call me father,
And think they are my sons, are none of mine;
They are the issue of your loins, my liege,
And blood of your begetting. How? my issue?
So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan,
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banished.
Your pleasure was my [mere] offense, my punishment
Itself, and all my treason: that I suffered
Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes
(For such and so they are) these twenty years
Have I trained up; those arts they have as I
Could put into them. My breeding was, sir, as
Your Highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile
(Whom for the theft I wedded), stole these children 
Upon my banishment; I moved her to't,
Having received the punishment before 
For that which I did then. Beaten for loyalty 
Excited me to treason. Their dear loss,
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
Here are your sons again, and I must lose
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.
The benediction of these covering heavens
Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
To inlay heaven with stars. Thou weep'st, and speak'st.
The service that you three have done is more
Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children;
If these be they, I know not how to wish
A pair of worthier sons. Be pleased awhile:
This gentleman, whom I call Polydore,
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius;
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,
Your younger princely son. He, sir, was lapped
In a most curious mantle, wrought by th' hand
Of his queen mother, which for more probation 
I can with ease produce. Guiderius had 
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star, 
It was a mark of wonder. This is he,
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp.
It was wise nature's end in the donation,
To be his evidence now. O, what, am I
A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother
Rejoiced deliverance more. Blest pray you be,
That after this strange starting from your orbs,
You may reign in them now! O Imogen,
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom. No, my lord;
I have got two worlds by't. O my gentle brothers,
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker. You called me brother,
When I was but your sister; I you brothers,
When we were so indeed. Did you e'er meet?
Ay, my good lord. And at first meeting loved, 
Continued so, until we thought he died.
By the Queen's dram she swallowed. O rare instinct! 
When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgment
Hath to it circumstantial branches, which
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived you?
And when came you to serve our Roman captive?
How parted with your [brothers]? How first met them?
Why fled you from the court? and whither? These,
And your three motives to the battle, with
I know not how much more, should be demanded,
And all the other by-dependances,
From chance to chance; but nor the time nor place
Will serve our long interrogatories. See,
Posthumus anchors upon Imogen;
And she (like harmless lightning) throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting
Each object with a joy; the counterchange
Is severally in all. Let's quit this ground,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
Thou art my brother, so we'll hold thee ever. 
You are my father too, and did relieve me
To see this gracious season. All o'erjoyed, 
Save these in bonds. Let them be joyful too,
For they shall taste our comfort. My good master,
I will yet do you service. Happy be you!
The forlorn soldier, that [so] nobly fought,
He would have well becomed this place, and graced
The thankings of a king. I am, sir,
The soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming; 'twas a fitment for
The purpose I then followed. That I was he,
Speak, Jachimo. I had you down and might
Have made you finish. I am down again;
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
Which I so often owe; but your ring first,
And here the bracelet of the truest princess
That ever swore her faith. Kneel not to me.
The pow'r that I have on you is to spare you; 
The malice towards you, to forgive you. Live, 
And deal with others better. Nobly doomed!
We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law:
Pardon's the word to all. You holp us, sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our brother;
Joyed are we that you are.
Your servant, Princes. Good my lord of Rome,
Call forth your soothsayer. As I slept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle backed,
Appeared to me, with other spritely shows
Of mine own kindred. When I waked, I found
This label on my bosom, whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness, that I can
Make no collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction. Philarmonus!
Here, my good lord. Read, and declare the meaning. 
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp;
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter,
Is this most constant wife, who, even now,
Answering the letter of the oracle,
Unknown to you, unsought, were clipt about
With this most tender air. This hath some seeming.
The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
Personates thee; and thy lopped branches point
Thy two sons forth; who, by Belarius stol'n, 
For many years thought dead, are now revived,
To the majestic cedar joined, whose issue 
Promises Britain peace and plenty. Well,
My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar,
And to the Roman empire, promising
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen,
Whom heavens, in justice both on her and hers,
The fingers of the pow'rs above do tune
The harmony of this peace. The vision
Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke
Of yet this scarce-cold battle, at this instant
Is full accomplished: for the Roman eagle,
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
Lessened herself, and in the beams o' th' sun
So vanished; which foreshowed our princely eagle,
Th' imperial Caesar, should again unite
His favor with the radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the west. Laud we the gods,
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils 
From our blest altars. Publish we this peace
To all our subjects. Set we forward. Let 
A Roman and a British ensign wave 
Friendly together. So through Lud's-Town march,
And in the temple of great Jupiter
Our peace we'll ratify; seal it with feasts.
Set on there! Never was a war did cease
(Ere bloody hands were washed) with such a peace.
