<H5vs> O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention!
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels
(Leashed in, like hounds) should famine, sword, and fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,
The flat unraised spirits that hath dared
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
So great an object. Can this cockpit hold 
The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this wooden O the very casques 
That did affright the air at Agincourt? 
O, pardon! since a crooked figure may
Attest in little place a million,
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
On your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
Are now confined two mighty monarchies,
Whose high, upreared, and abutting fronts
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts;
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance;
Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth;
For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
Turning th' accomplishment of many years
Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,
Admit me Chorus to this history;
Who, Prologue-like, your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play. 
My lord, I'll tell you, that self bill is urged
Which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign
Was like, and had indeed against us passed,
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
It must be thought on. If it pass against us,
We lose the better half of our possession;
For all the temporal lands, which men devout
By testament have given to the Church,
Would they strip from us; being valued thus:
As much as would maintain, to the King's honor,
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
And to relief of lazars, and weak age
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
A hundred almshouses right well supplied;
And to the coffers of the King beside,
A thousand pounds by th' year. Thus runs the bill. 
This would drink deep. 'Twould drink the cup and all. 
The King is full of grace and fair regard.
And a true lover of the holy Church.
The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his father's body,
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment,
Consideration like an angel came
And whipt th' offending Adam out of him,
Leaving his body as a paradise
T' envelop and contain celestial spirits.
Never was such a sudden scholar made;
Never came reformation in a flood
With such a heady currance, scouring faults;
Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness
So soon did lose his seat (and all at once)
As in this king. We are blessed in the change.
Hear him but reason in divinity,
And all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a prelate; 
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
You would say it hath been all in all his study; 
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear 
A fearful battle rend'red you in music;
Turn him to any cause of policy,
The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;
So that the art and practic part of life
Must be the mistress to this theoric;
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to courses vain,
His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports;
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts and popularity.
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
Neighbored by fruit of baser quality;
And so the prince obscured his contemplation 
Under the veil of wildness, which (no doubt)
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, 
Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty. 
It must be so; for miracles are ceased;
And therefore we must needs admit the means
How things are perfected. But, my good lord,
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urged by the commons? Doth his Majesty
Incline to it, or no? He seems indifferent;
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Than cherishing th' exhibiters against us;
For I have made an offer to his Majesty,
Upon our spiritual convocation
And in regard of causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France, to give a greater sum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
Did to his predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?
With good acceptance of his Majesty;
Save that there was not time enough to hear, 
As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,
The severals and unhidden passages 
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, 
And generally to the crown and seat of France,
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.
What was th' impediment that broke this off?
The French embassador upon that instant
Craved audience; and the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Is it four a' clock?
Then go we in, to know his embassy;
Which I could with a ready guess declare,
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
I'll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?
Not here in presence. Send for him, good uncle. 
Shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved, 
Before we hear him, of some things of weight 
That task our thoughts, concerning us and France.
God and his angels guard your sacred throne,
And make you long become it! Sure we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed,
And justly and religiously unfold
Why the law Salique, that they have in France,
Or should, or should not, bar us in our claim;
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colors with the truth;
For God doth know how many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person, 
How you awake our sleeping sword of war --
We charge you, in the name of God, take heed; 
For never two such kingdoms did contend 
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint,
'Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this conjuration speak, my lord;
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart,
That what you speak is in your conscience washed
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness' claim to France
But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
"In terram Salicam mulieres ne [succedant],"
"No woman shall succeed in Salique land";
Which Salique land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm 
That the land Salique is in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of [Elbe]; 
Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons, 
There left behind and settled certain French;
Who holding in disdain the German women
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Established then this law: to wit, no female
Should be inheritrix in Salique land;
Which Salique, as I said, 'twixt [Elbe] and Sala,
Is at this day in Germany called Meisen.
Then doth it well appear the Salique law
Was not devised for the realm of France;
Nor did the French possess the Salique land
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly supposed the founder of this law,
Who died within the year of our redemption
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
Subdued the Saxons, and did seat the French
Beyond the river Sala, in the year 
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric, 
Did, as heir general, being descended 
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To [fine] his title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught,
Conveyed himself as th' heir to th' Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son
To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Was re-united to the crown of France.
So that, as clear as is the summer's sun, 
King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim,
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear 
To hold in right and title of the female; 
So do the kings of France unto this day.
Howbeit, they would hold up this Salique law
To bar your Highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Usurped from you and your progenitors.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!
For in the book of Numbers is it writ,
When the man dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter. Gracious lord,
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,
Look back into your mighty ancestors;
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,
And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a tragedy,
Making defeat on the full power of France,
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill 
Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility. 
O noble English, that could entertain 
With half their forces the full pride of France,
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work and cold for action!
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
You are their heir, you sit upon their throne;
The blood and courage that renowned them
Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
As did the former lions of your blood.
They know your Grace hath cause, and means, and might;
So hath your Highness. Never King of England
Had nobles richer and more loyal subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England,
And lie pavilioned in the fields of France.
O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege, 
With [blood] and sword and fire, to win your right;
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty 
Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum 
As never did the clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your ancestors.
We must not only arm t' invade the French,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us;
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Never went with his forces into France
But that the Scot on his unfurnished kingdom
Came pouring like the tide into a breach,
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays, 
Girding with grievous siege castles and towns;
That England being empty of defense, 
Hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood. 
She hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege;
For hear her but exampled by herself:
When all her chevalry hath been in France,
And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended
But taken and impounded as a stray
The King of Scots; whom she did send to France
To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner kings,
And make [her] chronicle as rich with praise
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.
But there's a saying very old and true,
For once the eagle [England] being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weasel [Scot]
Comes sneaking, and so sucks her princely eggs,
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To 'tame and havoc more than she can eat. 
It follows then the cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a crushed necessity, 
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries, 
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
Th' advised head defends itself at home;
For government, though high, and low, and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music. Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavor in continual motion;
To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,
Obedience; for so work the honey-bees,
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king, and officers of sorts,
Where some, like magistrates, correct at home;
Others, like merchants, venter trade abroad;
Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home 
To the tent-royal of their emperor;
Who busied in his [majesty] surveys 
The singing masons building roofs of gold, 
The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burthens at his narrow gate,
The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,
Delivering o'er to executors pale
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer,
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously,
As many arrows loosed several ways
Come to one mark; as many ways meet in one town;
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;
As many lines close in the dial's centre;
So may a thousand actions, once afoot,
[End] in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog, 
Let us be worried, and our nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy. 
Call in the messengers sent from the Dolphin. 
Now are we well resolved, and by God's help
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we'll bend it to our awe,
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we'll sit,
Ruling in large and ample empery
O'er France and all her (almost) kingly dukedoms,
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
Either our history shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshipped with a waxen epitaph.
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure
Of our fair cousin Dolphin; for we hear
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.
May't please your Majesty to give us leave 
Freely to render what we have in charge?
Or shall we sparingly show you far off 
The Dolphin's meaning and our embassy? 
We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fett'red in our prisons;
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
Tell us the Dolphin's mind. Thus then in few:
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right
Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.
In answer of which claim, the prince our master
Says that you savor too much of your youth,
And bids you be advised: there's nought in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won;
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dolphin speaks.
What treasure, uncle? Tennis-balls, my liege. 
We are glad the Dolphin is so pleasant with us, 
His present and your pains we thank you for. 
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will in France, by God's grace, play a set
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturbed
With chaces. And we understand him well,
How he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England,
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
To barbarous license; as 'tis ever common
That men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dolphin I will keep my state,
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness
When I do rouse me in my throne of France.
For that I have laid by my majesty,
And plodded like a man for working-days;
But I will rise there with so full a glory
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea, strike the Dolphin blind to look on us. 
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
Hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul 
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance 
That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands;
Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
That shall have cause to curse the Dolphin's scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Tell you the Dolphin I am coming on
To venge me as I may, and to put forth
My rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause.
So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dolphin
His jest will savor but of shallow wit, 
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it. --
Convey them with safe conduct. -- Fare you well. 
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
That may give furth'rance to our expedition;
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore let our proportions for these wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More feathers to our wings; for, God before,
We'll chide this Dolphin at his father's door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought. 
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies;
Now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man. 
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
Following the mirror of all Christian kings, 
With winged heels, as English Mercuries. 
For now sits Expectation in the air,
And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point,
With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets,
Promised to Harry and his followers.
The French, advised by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England! model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What mightst thou do, that honor would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural!
But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out,
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills
With treacherous crowns; and three corrupted men,
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland,
Have for the gilt of France (O guilt indeed!)
Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France, 
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If hell and treason hold their promises, 
Ere he take ship for France; and in Southhampton. 
Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
The King is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southhampton;
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit,
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
And bring you back, charming the Narrow Seas
To give you gentle pass; for if we may,
We'll not offend one stomach with our play.
But till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southhampton do we shift our scene. 
Will you shog off? I would have you solus.
"Solus," egregious dog? O viper vile!
The "solus" in thy most mervailous face,
The "solus" in thy teeth, and in thy throat, 
And which is worse, within thy nasty mouth! 
I do retort the "solus" in thy bowels, 
For I can take, and Pistol's cock is up,
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give.
That is the word. I [thee defy] again.
O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to get? 
And from the powd'ring-tub of infamy
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind,
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.
I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
A noble shalt thou have, and present pay,
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.
I'll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me.
Is not this just? For I shall sutler be
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. 
'Fore God, his Grace is bold to trust these traitors. 
They shall be apprehended by and by.
How smooth and even they do bear themselves! 
As if allegiance in their bosoms sate 
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception which they dream not of.
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors --
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
His sovereign's life to death and treachery.
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the pow'rs we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
Doing the execution and the act
For which we have in head assembled them?
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded 
We carry not a heart with us from hence
That grows not in a fair consent with ours; 
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish 
Success and conquest to attend on us.
Never was monarch better feared and loved
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.
True; those that were your father's enemies
Have steeped their galls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit,
According to the weight and worthiness.
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labor shall refresh itself with hope
To do your Grace incessant services. 
We judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday, 
That railed against our person. We consider 
It was excess of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.
That's mercy, but too much security.
Let him be punished, sovereign, lest example
Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.
You show great mercy if you give him life
After the taste of much correction.
Alas, your too much love and care of me
Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch!
If little faults, proceeding on distemper,
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and digested,
Appear before us? We'll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care
And tender preservation of our person,
Would have him punished. And now to our French causes.
Who are the late commissioners? I one, my lord. 
Your Highness bade me ask for it today.
Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;
There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, sir knight,
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours:
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmerland, and uncle Exeter,
We will aboard tonight. -- Why, how now, gentlemen?
What see you in those papers that you lose
So much complexion? -- Look ye how they change!
Their cheeks are paper. -- Why, what read you there
That have so cowarded and chased your blood
Out of appearance? I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness' mercy.
The mercy that was quick in us but late,
By your own counsel is suppressed and killed. 
You must not dare (for shame) to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms, 
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you. 
See you, my princes and my noble peers,
These English monsters! My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish [him] with all appertinents
Belonging to his honor; and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton. To the which
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But O,
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel,
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature?
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
That (almost) mightst have coined me into gold,
Wouldst thou have practiced on me, for thy use?
May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange,
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross 
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason and murther ever kept together, 
As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose, 
Working so grossly in [a] natural cause
That admiration did not hoop at them;
But thou ('gainst all proportion) didst bring in
Wonder to wait on treason and on murther;
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;
And other devils that suggest by treasons
Do botch and bungle up damnation
With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched
From glist'ring semblances of piety;
But he that tempered thee, bade thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
He might return to vasty Tartar back,
And tell the legions,"I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishman's."
O, how hast thou with jealousy infected 
The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned? 
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family? 
Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion, or of mirth or anger,
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Garnished and decked in modest complement,
Not working with the eye without the ear,
And but in purged judgment trusting neither?
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To [mark the] full-fraught man and best indued
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee;
For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like
Another fall of man. Their faults are open,
Arrest them to the answer of the law,
And God acquit them of their practices!
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of [Henry]
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas 
Our purposes God justly hath discovered, 
And I repent my fault more than my death, 
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.
For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The sooner to effect what I intended.
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which [I] in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God, and you, to pardon me.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself,
Prevented from a damned enterprise.
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.
God quit you in his mercy! Hear your sentence.
You have conspired against our royal person,
Received the golden earnest of our death;
Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter, 
His princes and his peers to servitude,
His subjects to oppression and contempt, 
And his whole kingdom into desolation. 
Touching our person seek we no revenge,
But we our kingdom's safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you [have] sought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death;
The taste whereof God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance
Of all your dear offenses! Bear them hence.
Now, lords, for France; the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen! Let us deliver
Our puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to sea! The signs of war advance! 
No king of England, if not king of France!
Come, let's away. My love, give me thy lips.
Look to my chattels and my moveables.
Let senses rule; the [word] is "Pitch and pay";
For oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes,
And Hold-fast is the only dog, my duck;
Therefore [Caveto] be thy counsellor.
Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,
Let us to France, like horse-leeches, my boys,
To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck!
And that's but unwholesome food, they say.
Touch her soft mouth, and march. Farewell, hostess. 
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more than care fully it us concerns
To answer royally in our defenses.
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Britain,
Of Brabant and of Orleance, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dolphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant;
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident 
As fear may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English 
Upon our fields. My most redoubted father,
It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe;
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom
(Though war nor no known quarrel were in question)
But that defenses, musters, preparations,
Should be maintained, assembled, and collected,
Therefore, I say, 'tis meet we all go forth
To view the sick and feeble parts of France;
And let us do it with no show of fear,
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance;
For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged,
Her sceptre so fantastically borne,
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not. O, peace, Prince Dolphin,
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late embassadors,
With what great state he heard their embassy, 
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
How modest in exception, and withal 
How terrible in constant resolution, 
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly,
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.
Well, 'tis not so, my Lord High Constable;
But though we think it so, it is no matter.
In cases of defense 'tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems,
So the proportions of defense are filled;
Which, of a weak and niggardly projection,
Doth like a miser spoil his coat with scanting
A little cloth. Think we King Harry strong;
And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us;
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
That haunted us in our familiar paths.
Witness our too much memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck, 
And all our princes captived by the hand
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales; 
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing, 
Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun,
Saw his heroical seed, and smiled to see him,
Mangle the work of nature, and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock; and let us fear
The native mightiness and fate of him.
Embassadors from Harry King of England
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.
We'll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.
You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.
Turn head, and stop pursuit; for coward dogs
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know 
Of what a monarchy you are the head.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin 
As self-neglecting. From our brother of England?
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
That you divest yourself, and lay apart
The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven,
By law of nature and of nations, 'longs
To him and to his heirs, namely, the crown,
And all wide-stretched honors that pertain
By custom, and the ordinance of times,
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
'Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim,
Picked from the worm-holes of long-vanished days,
Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked,
He sends you this most memorable line,
In every branch truly demonstrative;
Willing you overlook this pedigree;
And when you find him evenly derived 
From his most famed of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign 
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held 
From him, the native and true challenger.
Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove,
That if requiring fail he will compel;
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head
Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries,
The dead men's blood, the privy maidens' groans,
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,
That shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message;
Unless the Dolphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly I bring greeting too.
For us, we will consider of this further.
tomorrow shall you bear our full intent 
Back to our brother of England. For the Dolphin, 
I stand here for him. What to him from England? 
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And any thing that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my King: and if your father's Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
He'll call you to so hot an answer of it
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
In second accent of his ordinance.
Say: if my father render fair return,
It is against my will; for I desire
Nothing but odds with England. To that end,
As matching to his youth and vanity,
I did present him with the Paris balls.
He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe;
And, be assured, you'll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days 
And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
Even to the utmost grain; that you shall read 
In your own losses, if he stay in France. 
tomorrow shall you know our mind at full. 
Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our King
Come here himself to question our delay;
For he is footed in this land already.
You shall be soon dispatched, with fair conditions.
A night is but small breath, and little pause,
To answer matters of this consequence. 
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies
In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen
The well-appointed king at [Hampton] pier
Embark his royalty; and his brave fleet
With silken streamers the young Phoebus [fanning].
Play with your fancies: and in them behold 
Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing;
Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give 
To sounds confused; behold the threaden sails, 
Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea,
Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage and behold
A city on th' inconstant billows dancing;
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Harflew. Follow, follow!
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England as dead midnight, still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance;
For who is he, whose chin is but enriched
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
Behold the ordinance on their carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harflew.
Suppose th' embassador from the French comes back,
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
Katherine his daughter, and with her, to dowry, 
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The offer likes not; and the nimble gunner 
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches, 
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eche out our performance with your mind. 
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;
Or close the wall up with our English dead.
In peace there's nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility;
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, [conjure] up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage;
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o'erwhelm it
As fearfully as doth a galled rock 
O'erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. 
Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, 
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. On, on, you [noblest] English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument.
Dishonor not your mothers; now attest
That those whom you called fathers did beget you.
Be copy now to [men] of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war. And you, good yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not;
For there is none of you so mean and base
That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
[Straining] upon the start. The game's afoot!
Follow your spirit; and upon this charge
Cry, "God for Harry, England, and Saint George!"
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!
Be merciful, great duke, to men of would.
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage,
How yet resolves the governor of the town?
This is the latest parle we will admit; 
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves, 
Or like to men proud of destruction,
Defy us to our worst; for as I am a soldier,
A name that in my thoughts becomes me best,
If I begin the batt'ry once again,
I will not leave the half-achieved Harflew
Till in her ashes she lies buried.
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand, shall range,
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants.
What is it then to me, if impious War,
Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats
Enlinked to waste and desolation?
What is't to me, when you yourselves are cause,
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
When down the hill he holds his fierce career? 
We may as bootless spend our vain command
Upon th' enraged soldiers in their spoil, 
As send precepts to the leviathan 
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harflew,
Take pity of your town and of your people,
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
Of headly murther, spoil, and villainy.
If not -- why, in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
[Defile] the locks of your shrill-shriking daughters;
Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
And their most reverend heads dashed to the walls;
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughter-men.
What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid?
Or guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?
Our expectation hath this day an end. 
The Dolphin, whom of succors we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready 
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King, 
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensible.
Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harflew; there remain,
And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French.
Use mercy to them all for us, dear uncle.
The winter coming on, and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Callice.
tonight in Harflew will we be your guest;
tomorrow for the march are we addressed.
'Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.
And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France; let us quit all,
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
O Dieu vivant! shall a few sprays of us,
The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
[Mort [Dieu,] ma vie!] if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom,
To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm 
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle? 
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, 
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-reined jades, their barley-broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honor of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
Poor we call them in their native lords!
Our madams mock at us, and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos,
Saying our grace is only in our heels,
And that we are most lofty runaways.
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence,
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance. 
Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged 
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field!
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
You Dukes of Orleance, Bourbon, and of Berri,
Alanson, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy,
Jacques Chatillion, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpr‚, Roussi, and Faulconbridge,
[Foix], Lestrake, Bouciqualt, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and [knights],
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harflew.
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him, you have power enough,
And in a captive chariot into Roan
Bring him our prisoner. This becomes the great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famished in their march; 
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear, 
And for achievement offer us his ransom. 
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.
Prince Dolphin, you shall stay with us in Roan.
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of England's fall. 
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favors.
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
Bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart,
And of buxom valor, hath by cruel fate,
And giddy Fortune's furious fickle wheel,
That stands upon the rolling restless stone -- 
Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him;
For he hath stol'n a pax, and hanged must 'a be --
Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
Therefore go speak, the Duke will hear thy voice;
And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy King I do not seek him now,
But could be willing to march on to Callice
Without impeachment; for to say the sooth,
Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened; and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet forgive me, God, 
That I do brag thus! This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent. 
Go therefore tell thy master here I am; 
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk;
My army but a weak and sickly guard;
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself and such another neighbor
Stand in our way. There's for thy labor, Montjoy.
Go bid thy master well advise himself.
If we may pass, we will; if we be hind'red,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolor; and so, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle as we are,
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.
I hope they will not come upon us now.
We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge, it now draws toward night;
Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves, 
And on tomorrow bid them march away. 
Tut, I have the best armor of the world.
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen. 
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other's watch.
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the other's umbered face.
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents
The armorers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And the third hour of drowsy morning [name].
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and overlusty French 
Do the low-rated English play at dice;
And chide the cripple tardy-gaited night, 
Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp 
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The morning's danger; and their gesture sad,
Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Presented them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruined band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry, "Praise and glory on his head!"
For forth he goes, and visits all his host, 
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen. 
Upon his royal face there is no note 
How dread an army hath enrounded him;
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color
Unto the weary and all-watched night;
But freshly looks, and overbears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.
A largess universal, like the sun,
His liberal eye doth give to every one,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
A little touch of Harry in the night.
And so our scene must to the battle fly;
Where -- O for pity! -- we shall much disgrace
With four or five most vile and ragged foils
(Right ill disposed, in brawl ridiculous)
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.
Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger, 
The greater therefore should our courage be.
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out;
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed,
And make a moral of the devil himself.
Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Were better than a churlish turf of France.
Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say, "Now lie I like a king"
'Tis good for men to love their present pains 
Upon example; so the spirit is eased;
And when the mind is quick'ned, out of doubt, 
The organs, though defunct and dead before, 
Break up their drowsy grave, and newly move
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp;
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my pavilion.
Shall I attend your Grace? No, my good knight;
Go with my brothers to my lords of England.
I and my bosom must debate a while,
And then I would no other company.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!
Discuss unto me, art thou officer,
Or art thou base, common, and popular? 
I am a gentleman of a company. 
Trail'st thou the puissant pike? Even so. What are you?
As good a gentleman as the Emperor.
Then you are a better than the King.
The King's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
Upon the King! let us our lives, our souls,
Our children, and our sins lay on the King!
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing! What infinite heart's ease
Must kings neglect, that private men enjoy!
And what have kings, that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony?
What kind of god art thou, that suffer'st more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents? what are thy comings-in? 
O Ceremony, show me but thy worth!
What is thy soul of [adoration]? 
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form, 
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy, being feared,
What drink'st thou oft, in stead of homage sweet,
But poisoned flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
Thinks thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou command'st the beggar's knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That play'st so subtilly with a king's repose.
I am a king that find thee; and I know
'Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running 'fore the king,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world --
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony, 
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave; 
Who, with a body filled and vacant mind, 
Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread,
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell;
But like a lackey, from the rise to set,
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn,
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year
With profitable labor to his grave:
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil, and nights with sleep,
Had the forehand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the country's peace,
Enjoys it; but in gross brain little wots
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you. Good old knight,
Collect them all together at my tent. 
I'll be before thee. I shall do't, my lord. 
O God of battles, steel my soldiers' hearts,
Possess them not with fear! Take from them now
The sense of reck'ning, [if] th' opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
O, not today, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown!
I Richard's body have interred new,
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears,
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built
Two chauntries, where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard's soul. More will I do;
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
My liege! My brother Gloucester,s voice? Ay; 
I know thy errand, I will go with thee.
The day, my [friends], and all things stay for me.
The sun doth gild our armor, up, my lords!
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh!
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes, 
And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!
What, will you have them weep our horses' blood? 
How shall we then behold their natural tears?
The English are embattled, you French peers.
To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse!
Do but behold yond poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands,
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,
That our French gallants shall today draw out,
The vapor of our valor will o'erturn them.
'Tis positive against all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm 
About our squares of battle, were enow
To purge this field of such a hilding foe; 
Though we upon this mountain's basis by 
Took stand for idle speculation --
But that our honors must not. What's to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
For our approach shall so much dare the field,
That England shall couch down in fear, and yield.
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favoredly become the morning field.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrout in their beggared host,
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks,
With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, 
The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the [gimmaled] bit 
Lies foul with chewed-grass, still and motionless; 
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle,
In life so liveless as it shows itself.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,
And give their fasting horses provender,
I stay but for my [guidon]; to the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come away!
The sun is high, and we outwear the day. 
The King himself is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.
There's five to one; besides, they all are fresh. 
God's arm strike with us! 'tis a fearful odds. 
God buy you, princes all; I'll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu!
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee!
Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly today!
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.
He is as full of valor as of kindness,
Princely in both. O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
My cousin Westmerland? No, my fair cousin. 
If we are marked to die, we are enow
To do our country loss; and if to live, 
The fewer men, the greater share of honor. 
God's will, I pray thee wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires.
But if it be a sin to covet honor,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.
God's peace, I would not lose so great an honor
As one man more methinks would share from me,
Rather proclaim it, Westmerland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart, his passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse.
We would not die in that man's company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the feast of Crispian:
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a' tiptoe when this day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors, 
And say, "tomorrow is Saint Crispian."
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars, 
[And say, "These wounds I had on Crispin's day."] 
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly rememb'red.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered --
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England, now a-bed,
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here;
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed. 
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
God's will, my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men;
Which likes me better than to wish us one.
You know your places. God be with you all!
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow;
For certainly thou art so near the gulf, 
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind 
Thy followers of repentance; that their souls 
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields, where (wretches!) their poor bodies
Must lie and fester. Who hath sent thee now?
I pray thee bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me, and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the lion's skin
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves; upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this day's work.
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them,
And draw their honors reeking up to heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France. 
Mark then abounding valor in our English:
That being dead, like to the bullet's crasing, 
Break out into a second course of mischief, 
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
We are but warriors for the working-day;
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched
With rainy marching in the painful field;
There's not a piece of feather in our host --
Good argument (I hope) we will not fly --
And time hath worn us into slovenry.
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night,
They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this --
As, if God please, they shall -- my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labor.
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald,
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
Which if they have as I will leave 'um them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well; 
Thou never shalt hear herald any more. 
I fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom. 
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away,
And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!
O Signieur Dew should be a gentleman.
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark: 
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
Except, O signieur, thou do give to me 
[Or] I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,
Say'st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?
Come hither, boy, ask me this slave in French
Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Sits mocking in our plumes. O merchant fortune!
Do not run away. Why, all our ranks are broke.
O perdurable shame! let's stab ourselves.
Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let us die! In once more! back again!
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand
Like a base pander hold the chamber-door
Whilst [by a] slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.
Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now! 
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
We are enow yet living in the field 
To smother up the English in our throngs, 
If any order might be thought upon.
The devil take order now! I'll to the throng:
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen,
But all's not done -- yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting;
From helmet to the spur all blood he was.
In which array (brave soldier!) doth he lie,
Larding the plain; and by his bloody side
(Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds)
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies. 
Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped, 
And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes 
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud, "Tarry, my cousin Suffolk!
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven;
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry!"
Upon these words I came and cheered him up.
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
And with a feeble gripe, says,"Dear my lord,
Commend my service to my sovereign."
So did he turn and over Suffolk's neck
He threw his wounded arm, and kissed his lips,
And so espoused to death, with blood he sealed
A testament of noble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me which I would have stopped,
But I had not so much of man in me, 
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears. I blame you not, 
For hearing this, I must perforce compound
With [mistful] eyes, or they will issue too. 
But hark, what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforced their scattered men.
Then every soldier kill his prisoners,
I was not angry since I came to France 
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald, 
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field; they do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skirr away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings;
Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.
How now, what means this, herald? Know'st thou not
That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Com'st thou again for ransom? No, great King; 
I come to thee for charitable license,
That we may wander o'er this bloody field 
To book our dead, and then to bury them; 
To sort our nobles from our common men.
For many of our princes (woe the while!)
Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood;
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes, and [their] wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great King,
To view the field in safety, and dispose
Of their dead bodies! I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no,
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop o'er the field. The day is yours.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle called that stands hard by?
Then call we this the field of Agincourt, 
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
I wear it for a memorable honor;
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.
[God] keep me so! Our heralds go with him;
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.
My Lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The glove which I have given him for a favor
May haply purchase him a box a' th' ear.
It is the soldier's; I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it; 
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And touched with choler, hot as gunpowder, 
And quickly will return an injury. 
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow,
And wear it for an honor in thy cap
Till I do challenge it. Give him the crowns;
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
Here is the number of the slaught'red French.
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
Charles Duke of Orleance, nephew to the King,
John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt:
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty-six; added to these, 
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which, 
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights. 
So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
Jacques of Chatillion, Admiral of France,
The master of the cross-bows, Lord Rambures,
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin, 
John Duke of Alanson, Anthony Duke of Brabant,
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward Duke of Bar; of lusty earls,
Grandpre and Roussi, Faulconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrake.
Here was a royal fellowship of death!
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire; 
None else of name; and of all other men
But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here; 
And not to us, but to thy arm alone, 
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss,
On one part and on th' other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine! 'Tis wonderful!
Come, go [we] in procession to the village;
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this, or take that praise from God
Yes, captain; but with this acknowledgment,
Yes, my conscience, he did us great good.
Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum,
The dead with charity enclosed in clay;
And then to Callice, and to England then,
Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men. 
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,
That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Callice; grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, wives, and boys,
Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouthed sea,
Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the King
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath;
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city. He forbids it, 
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent 
Quite from himself to God. But now behold, 
In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens!
The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of th' antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caesar in;
As by a lower but by loving likelihood,
Were now the general of our gracious Empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit,
To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him --
As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of England's stay at home;
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them -- and omit
All the occurrences, what ever chanced,
Till Harry's back-return again to France.
There must we bring him; and myself have played 
The interim, by rememb'ring you 'tis past.
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance, 
After your thoughts, straight back again to France. 
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I that my Doll is dead i' th' spittle
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs
Honor is cudgelled. Well, bawd I'll turn,
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
To England will I steal, and there I'll steal;
And [swear] I got them in the Gallia wars. 
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!
Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine;
And as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy,
And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England, fairly met!
So are you, princes English, every one.
So happy be the issue, brother [England],
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes --
Your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French that met them in their bent
The fatal balls of murthering basilisks.
The venom of such looks we fairly hope
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love. 
To cry amen to that, thus we appear.
You English princes all, I do salute you. 
My duty to you both, on equal love. 
Great Kings of France and England: that I have labored
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors
To bring your most imperial Majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my office hath so far prevailed,
That face to face, and royal eye to eye,
You have congreeted. let it not disgrace me,
If I demand, before this royal view,
What rub or what impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled peace,
Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in it own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleached, 
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disordered twigs; her fallow leas 
The darnel, hemlock, and rank femetary 
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery;
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
Wanting the scythe withal, uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
Losing both beauty and utility;
And all our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our houses, and ourselves, and children,
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country,
But grow like savages -- as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood --
To swearing and stern looks, defused attire,
And every thing that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favor
You are assembled; and my speech entreats
That I may know the let why gentle Peace 
Should not expel these inconveniences,
And bless us with her former qualities. 
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to th' imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands,
Whose tenures and particular effects
You have enscheduled briefly in your hands.
The King hath heard them; to the which, as yet
There is no answer made. Well then: the peace,
Which you before so urged, lies in his answer.
I have but with a [cursitory] eye
O'erglanced the articles. Pleaseth your Grace
To appoint some of your Council presently
To sit with us once more, with better heed
To re-survey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King, 
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best 
Shall see advantageable for our dignity, 
Any thing in or out of our demands,
And we'll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes, or stay here with us?
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.
Happily a woman's voice may do some good,
When articles too nicely urged be stood on.
Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us:
She is our capital demand, comprised
Within the fore-rank of our articles.
She hath good leave. Fair Katherine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms,
Such as will enter at a lady's ear,
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?
We have consented to all terms of reason.
The King hath granted every article:
His daughter first; and in sequel, all, 
According to their firm proposed natures. 
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied,
But your request shall make me let it pass.
I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one article rank with the rest,
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other's happiness,
May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction
Plant neighborhood and Christian-like accord 
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France. 
Now welcome, Kate; and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,
That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the [paction] of these kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate league;
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day, 
My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath,
And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be!
Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen, 
Our bending author hath pursued the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time; but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England. Fortune made his sword;
By which the world's best garden he achieved,
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixt, in infant bands crowned King
Of France and England, did this king succeed;
Whose state so many had the managing,
That they lost France, and made his England bleed;
Which oft our stage hath shown; and for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take. 
