<hamvs> Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
'Tis now strook twelf. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
Have you had quiet guard? Not a mouse stirring. 
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
I think I hear them. Stand ho! Who is there?
Friends to this ground. And liegemen to the Dane.
Give you good night. O, farewell, honest [soldier].
Who hath relieved you? Barnardo hath my place.
Give you good night. Holla, Barnardo! Say --
What, is Horatio there? A piece of him.
Welcome, Horatio, welcome, good Marcellus.
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy, 
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us; 
Therefore I have entreated him along, 
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear. Sit down a while,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen. Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again! In the same
figure like the King that's dead.
Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio. 
Looks 'a not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
Most like; it [harrows] me with fear and wonder. 
It would be spoke to. Speak to it, Horatio.
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
It is offended. See, it stalks away!
How now, Horatio? you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes. Is it not like the King?
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated. 
So frowned he once when in an angry parle 
He smote the sledded [Polacks] on the ice.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, 
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion,
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, 
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And [why] such daily [cast] of brazen cannon,
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week,
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint-laborer with the day:
Who is't that can inform me? That can I,
At least the whisper goes so: our last king, 
Whose image even but now appeared to us, 
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)]
Did slay this Fortinbras, who, by a sealed compact
Well ratified by law and heraldy,
Did forfeit (with his life) all [those] his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror;
Against the which a moi'ty competent
Was gaged by our king, which had [returned]
To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
Had he been vanquisher; as by the same comart
And carriage of the article [designed],
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in't, which is no other,
As it doth well appear unto our state, 
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands 
So by his father lost; and this, I take it, 
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood [tenantless] and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets.
As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of [feared] events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and earth together demonstrated 
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
But soft, behold! lo where it comes again!
I'll cross it though it blast me. Stay, illusion!
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me,
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, your spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it, stay and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Do, if it will not stand. 'Tis here! 'Tis here! 
We do it wrong, being so majestical, 
To offer it the show of violence, 
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine; and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long,
And then they say no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed, and so gracious, is that time. 
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad 
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. 
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe, 
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him 
Together with remembrance of ourselves. 
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
ln equal scale weighing delight and dole,
Taken to wife; nor have we herein barred 
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks. 
Now follows that you know young Fortinbras, 
Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Co-leagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
Now for ourself, and for this time of meeting,
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras --
Who, impotent and bedred, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose -- to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King, more than the scope 
Of these delated articles allow. 
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty. 
In that, and all things, will we show our duty. 
We doubt it nothing; heartily farewell.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit, what is't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes? My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France,
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave 
By laborsome petition, and at last 
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes, time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son --
A little more than kin, and less than kind. 
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Not so, my lord, I am too much in the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common, all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.
Ay, madam, it is common. If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Seems, madam? nay, it is, I know not "seems." 
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, [good] mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black, 
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, 
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, [shapes] of grief,
That can [denote] me truly. These indeed seem,
For they are actions that a man might play,
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness, 'tis unmanly grief,
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, or mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled:
For what we know must be, and is as common 
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition 
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven, 
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
"This must be so." We pray you throw to earth
This unprevailing woe, and think of us
As of a father, for let the world take note
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet,
I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply. 
Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet 
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof, 
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today,
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
O that this too too sallied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst [self-]slaughter! O God, God,
How [weary], stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on't, ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed, things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come [to this]!
But two months dead, nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr, so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth,
Must I remember? Why, she should hang on him 
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on, and yet, within a month -- 
Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman! -- 
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears -- why, she, [even she] --
O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer -- married with my uncle,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married -- O most wicked speed: to post
With such dexterity to incestious sheets,
It is not, nor it cannot come to good,
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Horatio -- or I do forget myself.
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever. 
Sir, my good friend -- I'll change that name with you. 
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? 
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
A truant disposition, good my lord.
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink [deep] ere you depart.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
I prithee do not mock me, fellow studient,
I think it was to [see] my mother's wedding.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio, the funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven 
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father -- methinks I see my father. 
Where, my lord? In my mind's eye, Horatio.
I saw him once, 'a was a goodly king.
'A was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encount'red: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
Appears before them, and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them; thrice he walked 
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled 
Almost to jelly with the act of fear, 
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
The apparition comes. I knew your father,
These hands are not more like. But where was this?
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Did you not speak to it? My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up it head and did address
Itself to motion like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight. 'Tis very strange.
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true,
And we did think it writ down in our duty 
Indeed, [indeed,] sirs. But this troubles me. 
Hold you the watch tonight? We do, my lord.
Armed, say you? Armed, my lord. From top to toe?
O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
What, looked he frowningly? A countenance more 
In sorrow than in anger. Pale, or red? 
Nay, very pale. And fixed his eyes upon you?
Most constantly. I would I had been there.
Very like, [very like]. Stayed it long?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundreth.
Not when I saw't. His beard was grisled, no?
It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered. I will watch tonight,
Perchance 'twill walk again. I warr'nt it will.
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still, 
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue. 
I will requite your loves. So fare you well. 
Upon the platform 'twixt aleven and twelf
I'll visit you. Our duty to your honor.
My father's spirit -- in arms! All is not well,
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then sit still, my soul. [Foul] deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
My necessaries are inbarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey [is] assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you. Do you doubt that?
For Hamlet, and che trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, 
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, 
The perfume and suppliance of a minute -- 
No more. No more but so? Think it no more:
For nature crescent does not grow alone
In thews and [bulk], but as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will, but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
[For he himself is subject to his birth:]
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and health of this whole state,
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further 
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain 
If with too credent ear you list his songs, 
Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
To his unmast'red importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary then, best safety lies in fear:
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother'
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, [like] a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, 
And reaks not his own rede. O, fear me not. 
I stay too long -- but here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace,
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There -- my blessing with thee!
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.:
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,
Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice,
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment. 
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy, rich, not gaudy, 
For the apparel oft proclaims the man, 
And they in France of the best rank and station
[Are] of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender [be],
For [loan] oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulleth [th'] edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell, my blessing season this in thee!
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
The time invests you, go, your servants tend.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself 
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous. 
If it be so -- as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution -- I must tell you,
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
Marry, I will teach you: think yourself a baby 
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
[Wringing] it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to. 
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, 
With almost all the holy vows of heaven. 
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence,
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him, that he is young,
And with a larger teder may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere [implorators] of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
The better to [beguile]. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. 
The air bites shrowdly, it is very cold.
It is [a] nipping and an eager air.
What hour now? I think it lacks of twelf.
Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring up-spring reels;
And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge. Is it a custom? 
But to my mind, though I am native here 
And to the manner born, it is a custom 
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clip us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition, and indeed it takes
From our achievements, though performed at height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So, oft it chances in particular men,
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty
(Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By their o'ergrowth of some complexion
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
Or by some habit, that too much o'er-leavens
The form of plausive manners -- that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption 
From that particular fault: the dram of [ev'l]
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt 
To his own scandal. Look, my lord, it comes!
Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven, or blasts from hell,
Be thy intents wicked, or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,
Wherein we saw thee quietly [inurned,]
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean, 
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, 
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature 
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say why is this? wherefore? what should we do?
It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone. Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground,
But do not go with it. No, by no means.
It will not speak, then I will follow it.
Do not, my lord. Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee,
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again, I'll follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, 
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea, 
And there assume some other horrible form 
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason,
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fadoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath. It waves me still. --
You shall not go, my lord. Hold off your hands.
Be ruled, you shall not go. My fate cries out,
And makes each petty artere in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say away! -- Go on, I'll follow thee.
He waxes desperate with [imagination].
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him. 
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark. 
Heaven will direct it. Nay, let's follow him. 
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I'll go no further.
Mark me. I will. My hour is almost come
When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself. Alas, poor ghost!
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night, 
And for the day confined to fast in fires,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature 
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid 
To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love --
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
Murther most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Haste me to know't, that I with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge. I find thee apt, 
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, 
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: 
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me, so the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused; but know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown. O my prophetic soul!
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts --
O wicked wit and gifts that have the power
So to seduce! -- won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what [a] falling-off was there
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
But virtue, as it never will be moved, 
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So [lust], though to a radiant angel linked, 
Will [sate] itself in a celestial bed 
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distillment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth [posset]
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatched,
Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, 
Unhous'led, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account 
With all my imperfections on my head. 
O, horrible, O, horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not,
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!
The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,
And gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu! remember me. 
O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
And you, my sinows, grow not instant old,
But bear me [stiffly] up. Remember thee!
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee!
Yea, from the table of my memory 
I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past 
That youth and observation copied there, 
And thy commandement all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables -- meet it is I set it down
That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain!
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
It is "Adieu, adieu! remember me."
I have sworn't. My lord, my lord! Lord Hamlet!
How is't, my noble lord? What news, my lord? 
Not I, my lord, by heaven. Nor I, my lord.
How say you then, would heart of man once think it? -- 
But you'll be secret? Ay, by heaven, [my lord].
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave 
To tell us this. Why, right, you are in the right,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you,
For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is, and for my own poor part, 
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord. 
I am sorry they offend you, heartily,
Yes, faith, heartily. There's no offense, my lord.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
My lord, we will not. Nay, but swear't. In faith,
My lord, not I. Nor I, my lord, in faith.
Upon my sword. We have sworn, my lord, already.
Ha, ha, boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny? 
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage,
Consent to swear. Propose the oath, my lord.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword. Swear. Then we'll shift our ground.
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Well said, old mole, canst work i, th' earth so fast?
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange! 
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself --
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on --
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, 
With arms encumb'red thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, 
Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
That you know aught of me -- this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint -- O cursed spite,
That ever I was born to set it right!
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire 
Of his behavior. My lord, I did intend it.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris,
And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,
As thus, "I know his father and his friends,
And in part him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
"And in part him -- but," you may say, "not well.
But if't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so," and there put on him
What forgeries you please: marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips 
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty. As gaming, my lord. 
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
Faith, as you may season it in the charge:
You must not put another scandal on him,
That he is open to incontinency --
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault. But, my good lord --
Wherefore should you do this? Ay, my lord,
I would know that. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit:
You laying these slight sallies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled [wi' th'] working, 
Your party in converse, him you would sound, 
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes 
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country. Very good, my lord.
And then, sir, does 'a this -- 'a does -- what was
At "closes in the consequence," ay, marry.
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday, or th' other day,
Or then, or then, with such or such, and as you say,
There was 'a gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or, perchance,
"I saw him enter such a house of sale,"
a brothel, or so forth. See you now,
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth, 
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias, 
By indirections find directions out; 
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
My lord, I have. God buy ye, fare ye well.
And let him ply his music. Well, my lord.
Farewell. How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockins fouled,
Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other, 
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell 
To speak of horrors -- he comes before me. 
Mad for thy love? My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it. What said he?
He took me by the wrist, and held me hard,
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As 'a would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out a' doors he went without their helps,
And to the last bended their light on me.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love, 
Whose violent property fordoes itself,
And leads the will to desperate undertakings 
As oft as any passions under heaven 
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry --
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters, and denied
His access to me. That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions,
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might move 
More grief to hide, than hate to utter love.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern! 
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation; so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself,
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him,
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you voutsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus,
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living 
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and good will 
As to expend your time with us a while 
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance. Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty. But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
To lay our service freely at your feet,
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son. Go some of you
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him! Ay, amen!
Th' embassadors from Norway, my good lord, 
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king;
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
O, speak of that, that do I long to hear.
Give first admittance to th' embassadors;
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in. 
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
I doubt it is no other but the main,
His father's death and our [o'erhasty] marriage.
Well, we shall sift him. -- Welcome, my good friends! 
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack;
But better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat grieved,
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which lie, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him threescore thousand crowns in annual fee,
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied, as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise, 
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down. It likes us well, 
And at our more considered time we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Mean time, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest, at night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home! This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time,
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time;
Therefore, [since] brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad:
Mad call I it, for to define true madness,
What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go. More matter with less art.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true, 'tis true 'tis pity, 
And pity 'tis 'tis true -- a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art. 
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains 
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause:
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
I have a daughter -- have while she is mine --
Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
This in obedience hath my daughter shown me,
And more [above], hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear. But how hath she
Received his love? What do you think of me?
As of a man faithful and honorable.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wine --
As I perceived it (I must tell you that)
Before my daughter told me -- what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book,
Or given my heart a [winking,] mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight, 
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: 
"Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy star ; 
This must not be"; and then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from [his] resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice;
And he repelled, a short tale to make,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to [a] lightness, and by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves,
And all we mourn for. Do you think ['tis] this?
Hath there been such a time -- I would fain know that --
That I have positively said," 'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise? Not that I know.
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find 
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
Within the centre. How may we try it further? 
You know sometimes he walks four hours together 
Here in the lobby. So he does indeed.
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
Be you and I behind an arras then,
Mark the encounter: if he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters. We will try it.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
Away, I do beseech you, both away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave,
Excellent well, you are a fishmonger. 
Words, words, words. What is the matter, my lord?
I mean, the matter that you read, my lord. 
As the indifferent children of the earth.
Happy, in that we are not [over-]happy, on
Fortune's [cap] we are not the very button.
Nor the soles of her shoe? Neither, my lord.
None, my lord, but the world's grown honest.
Denmark's a prison. Then is the world one.
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
O, there has been much throwing about of brains. 
"It came to pass, as most like it was" --
"The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast -- " 
'Tis not so, it begins with Pyrrhus: 
"The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldy more dismal: head to foot
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'er-sized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks." So proceed you. 
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched, 
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide,
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword 
Th' unnerved father falls. [Then senseless Ilium,] 
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear; for lo his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverent Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
[And,] like a neutral to his will and matter,
But as we often see, against some storm,
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so after Pyrrhus' pause,
A roused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor forged for proof eterne
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,
In general synod take away her power! 
Break all the spokes and [fellies] from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven 
As low as to the fiends!" This is too long.
It shall to the barber's with your beard.
"But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen" --
"Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames 
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'er-teemed loins,
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up -- 
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounced. 
But if the gods themselves did see her then, 
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her [husband's] limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made,
Unless things mortal move them not at all,
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit 
That from her working all the visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect, 
A broken voice, an' his whole function suiting 
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing,
What's Hecuba to him, or he to [Hecuba],
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and [the cue] for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty, and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
can say nothing; no, not for a king,
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me villain, breaks my pate across,
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face,
Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Hah, 'swounds, I should take it; for it cannot be 
But I am pigeon-livered, and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this 
I should 'a' fatted all the region kites 
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear [father] murthered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must like a whore unpack my heart with words,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have by the very cunning of the scene
Been strook so to the soul, that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions:
For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murther of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks,
I'll tent him to the quick. If 'a do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a [dev'l], and the [dev'l] hath power 
T' assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, 
As he is very potent with such spirits, 
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this -- the play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King. 
An' can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause 'a will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state. Did he receive you well?
But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question, but of our demands 
Did you assay him To any pastime? 
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way; of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him. 'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,
And drive his purpose into these delights.
We shall, my lord. Sweet Gertrude, leave us two,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, 
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia. Her father and myself, 
We'll so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, 
We may of their encounter frankly judge,
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for. I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors. Madam, I wish it may. 
Ophelia, walk you here. -- Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. Read on this book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your [loneliness]. We are oft to blame in this --
'Tis too much proved -- that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself. O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! 
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art, 
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
To be, or not to be, that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep --
No more, and by a sleep to say we end
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to; 'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep --
To sleep, perchance to dream -- ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause; there's the respect 
That makes calamity of so long life:
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, 
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, 
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin; who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country, from whose bourn
No traveller returns, puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards [of us all],
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action. -- Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia. Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins rememb'red. Good my lord, 
How does your honor for this many a day?
My lord, I have remembrances of yours 
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them. No, not I,
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made these things more rich. Their perfume lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord. Ha, ha! are you honest?
My lord? Are you fair? What means your lordship?
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword,
Th' expectation and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his [music] vows,
Now see [that] noble and most sovereign reason
Like sweet bells jangled out of time, and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
Love? his affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood, 
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent, 
I have in quick determination 
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on't?
It shall do well; but yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said,
We heard it all. My lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him,
And I'll be placed (so please you) in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think. It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not [unwatched] go. 
And the Queen too, and that presently.
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
O my dear lord -- Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee 
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish her election,
Sh' hath sealed thee for herself, for thou hast been
As one in suff'ring all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well co-meddled,
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a play tonight before the King,
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul 
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech, 
It is a damned ghost that we have seen, 
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And after we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming. Well, my lord.
If 'a steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
And scape [detecting], I will pay the theft.
Ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
No, good mother, here's metal more attractive. 
Do you think I meant country matters?
That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs. 
You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the play. 
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round 
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite comutual in most sacred bands.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me, you are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from [your] former state,
That I distrust you. Yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must,
[For] women's fear and love hold quantity, 
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my [love] is, proof hath made you know, 
And as my love is sized, my fear is so. 
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
My operant powers their functions leave to do,
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved, and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou -- O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accursed!
None wed the second but who killed the first.
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
I do believe you think what now you speak, 
But what we do determine, oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory, 
Of violent birth, but poor validity, 
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief [joys], joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change:
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies,
The poor advanced makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his enemy. 
But orderly to end where I begun,
Our wills and fates do so contrary run 
That our devices still are overthrown, 
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
[An] anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here a while, 
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep. Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain! 
The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing, 
[Confederate] season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecat's ban thrice blasted, thrice [infected],
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurps immediately.
'A poisons him i' th' garden for his estate.
What, frighted with false fire?] How fares my lord?
Give o'er the play. Give me some light. Away!
O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word
Ah, ha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders! 
For if the King like not the comedy,
Why then belike he likes it not, perdy. 
And do still, by these pickers and stealers. 
By th' mass and 'tis, like a camel indeed.
'Tis now the very witching time of night, 
When churchyards yawn and hell itself [breathes] out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such [bitter business as the] day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature! let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom,
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
I will speak [daggers] to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites --
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never my soul consent! 
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure 
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows. We will ourselves provide. 
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it. Or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose [huge] spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous [ruin]. Never alone
Did the King sigh, but [with] a general groan.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy viage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed. We will haste us. 
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege,
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know. Thanks, dear my lord.
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven,
It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
A brother's murther. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood, 
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy 
But to confront the visage of offense? 
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or [pardoned] being down? then I'll look up.
My fault is past, but, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murther"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murther:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world
Offense's gilded hand may [shove] by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law, but 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling, there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one can not repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death! 
O limed soul, that struggling to be free
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay, 
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart, with strings of steel, 
Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
Now might I do it [pat], now 'a is a-praying;
And now I'll do't -- and so 'a goes to heaven,
And so am I [revenged]. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
Why, this is [hire and salary], not revenge.
'A took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May,
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged,
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent: 
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th, incestious pleasure of his bed, 
At game a-swearing, or about some act 
That has no relish of salvation in't --
Then trip him. that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays,
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. 
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. 
'A will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
And that your Grace hath screened and stood between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here;
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue. 
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Why, how now, Hamlet? What's the matter now?
Have you forgot me? No, by the rood, not so:
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And would it were not so, you are my mother.
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not boudge;
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the [inmost] part of you.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
How now? A rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead! 
O, I am slain. O me, what hast thou done?
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king, and marry with his brother.
As kill a king! Ay, lady, it was my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune;
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger. --
Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit you down,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brassed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me? Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty, 
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose 
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths, O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words. Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom;
Is thought-sick at the act. Ay me, what act,
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Look here upon this picture, and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow:
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself, 
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury 
New lighted on a [heaven-]kissing hill, 
A combination and a form indeed,
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows:
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear,
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
And batten on this moor? ha, have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
And waits upon the judgment, and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion, but sure that sense
Is apoplexed, for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was,t
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, 
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush? 
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardure gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
Thou turn'st my [eyes into my very] soul,
And there I see such black and [grained] spots
As will [not] leave their tinct. Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty! O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet! A murtherer and a villain!
A slave that is not twentith part the [tithe]
Of your precedent lord, a Vice of kings, 
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole, 
Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say! Do not forget! This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits,
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse? 
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, 
And as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?
On him, on him! look you how pale he glares! 
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. -- Do not look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects, then what I have to do
Will want true color -- tears perchance for blood.
Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived! 
Look where he goes, even now, out at the portal.
This is the very coinage of your brain, 
This bodiless creation ecstasy
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
And [I] the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,
That not your trespass but my madness speaks;
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For in the fatness of these pursy times
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
O, throw away the worser part of it, 
And [live] the purer with the other half. 
Good night, but go not to my uncle's bed --
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
That monster custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain [to-]night,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
And either [....] the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more good night,
And when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gave him. So again good night. 
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins and worse remains behind. 
One word more, good lady. What shall I do?
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions in the basket creep,
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
I must to England, you know that? Alack, 
I had forgot. 'Tis so concluded on. 
There's letters sealed, and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petar, an't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines,
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counsellor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
Come, sir to draw toward an end with you.
There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves -- 
You must translate, 'tis fit we understand them.
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries, "A rat, a rat!"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man. O heavy deed!
It had been so with us had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all,
To you yourself, to us, to every one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man; but so much was our love, 
We would not understand what was most fit,
But like the owner of a foul disease, 
To keep it from divulging, let it feed 
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: 'a weeps for what is done.
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,
But we will ship him hence, and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!
Friends both, go join you with some further aid:
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do 
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter, 
As level as the cannon to his blank, 
Transports his pois'ned shot, may miss our name,
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay. 
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body? 
[Compounded] it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence, 
I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes,
And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved,
Or not at all. How now, what hath befall'n?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him. But where is he? 
Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure. 
Bring him before us. Ho, bring in the lord.
Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius? At supper.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety -- 
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done -- must send thee hence
[With fiery quickness]; therefore prepare thyself,
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and every thing is bent
For England. For England. Ay, Hamlet. Good.
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
Follow him at foot, tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not, I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for every thing is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught --
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us -- thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
How e'er my haps, my joys [were] ne'er [begun]. 
Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king. 
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye,
And let him know so. I will do't, my lord.
Go softly on. Good sir, whose powers are these?
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground 
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it; 
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole 
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Why then the Polack never will defend it.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats 
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.
God buy you, sir. Will't please you go, my lord?
I'll be with you straight -- go a little before.
How all occasions do inform against me,
And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason 
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple 
Of thinking too precisely on th' event -- 
A thought which quartered hath but one part wisdom
And ever three parts coward -- I do not know
Why yet I live to say, "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men,
That for a fantasy and trick of fame 
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, 
Which is not tomb enough and continent 
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth! 
She is importunate, indeed distract.
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart, 
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection; they yawn at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,
Which as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there might be thought, 
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew 
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss,
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Follow her close, give her good watch, I pray you. 
O, this is the poison of deep grief, it springs
All from her father's death -- and now behold!
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick and unwholesome in [their] thoughts and whispers
For good Polonius' death; and we have done but greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on this wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared, 
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this, 
Like to a murd'ring-piece, in many places 
Where is my Swissers? Let them guard the door.
What is the matter? Save yourself, my lord!
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flags with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
the ratifiers and props of every word,
[They] cry, "'Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
"Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!" A 
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs! 
Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.
No, let's come in. I pray you give me leave.
We will we will. I thank you keep the door. 
Give me my father! Calmly, good Laertes.
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard,
Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother. What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?
Let him go, Gertrude, do not fear our person:
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes, 
Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude.
But not by him. Let him demand his fill.
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Who shall stay you? My will, not all the world's:
And for my means, I'll husband them so well,
They shall go far with little. Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,
Winner and loser? None but his enemies. 
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms, 
And like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood. Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death,
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye. "Let her come in!"
O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
[Till] our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is't possible a young maid's wits
Should be as mortal as [an old] man's life?
[Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself 
[Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,]
And in his grave rained many a tear" --
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
"For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy. 
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself,
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand 
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours, 
To you in satisfaction; but if not, 
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content. Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral --
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation --
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call't in question. So you shall,
And where th' offense is, let the great axe fall.
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet. 
God bless you, sir. Let him bless thee too.
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend, 
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain 
Pursued my life. It well appears. But tell me
Why you [proceeded] not against these feats
So criminal and so capital in nature,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinowed,
But yet to me th' are strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself --
My virtue or my plague, be it either which --
She is so [conjunctive] to my life and soul,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive,
Why to a public count I might not go,
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so [loud a wind],
Would have reverted to my bow again, 
But not where I have aimed them.
And so have I a noble father lost, 
A sister driven into desp'rate terms, 
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections -- but my revenge will come.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think 
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine --
[How now? What news? Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:]
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
Sailors, my lord, they say, I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio, He received them
Of him that brought them. Laertes, you shall hear them. 
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
Know you the hand? 'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"!
And in a postscript here he says "alone."
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come,
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I [shall] live and tell him to his teeth,
"Thus didst thou." If it be so, Laertes --
As how should it be so? how otherwise? --
Will you be ruled by me? Ay, my lord,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned 
As [checking] at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him 
To an exploit, now ripe in my device, 
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ. It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
A very riband in the cap of youth,
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since 
Here was a gentleman of Normandy:
I have seen myself, and served against, the French, 
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant 
Had witchcraft in't, he grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,
As had he been incorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped [my] thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did. A Norman was't?
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his 
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg 
Your sudden coming o'er to play with you. 
Now, out of this -- What out of this, my lord?
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart? Why ask you this?
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time,
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of week or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still,
For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
Dies in his own too much. That we would do,
We should do when we would; for this "would" changes,
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents,
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift's sigh, 
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake 
To show yourself indeed your father's son 
More than in words? To cut his throat i' th' church.
No place indeed should murther sanctuarize,
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet returned shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together,
And wager o'er your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a [pass] of practice
Requite him for your father. I will do't,
And for [that] purpose I'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood, no cataplasm so rare, 
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death 
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point 
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death. Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad performance,
'Twere better not assayed; therefore this project
Should have a back or second, that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings --
When in your motion you are hot and dry --
As make your bouts more violent to that end --
And that he calls for drink, I'll have preferred him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there. But stay, what noise?
One woe doth tread upon another's heel, 
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
There is a willow grows askaunt the brook, 
That shows his hoary leaves in the glassy stream,
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cull-cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
There on the pendant boughs her crownet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress,
Or like a creature native and indued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death. Alas, then she is drowned?
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, 
And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
It is our trick, Nature her custom holds, 
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone, 
The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord,
I have a speech a' fire that fain would blaze,
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again,
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the [winter's] flaw!
But soft, but soft awhile, here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand 
Foredo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we a while and mark. What ceremony else? 
That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers,
[Shards,] flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Must there no more be done? No more be done:
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls. Lay her i' th' earth, 
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest, 
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be 
When thou liest howling. What, the fair Ophelia!
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife.
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave. O, treble woe
Fall ten times [treble] on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth a while,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus. What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow 
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, 
The devil take thy soul! Thou pray'st not well.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat.
For though I am not splenitive [and] rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
Pluck them asunder. Hamlet, Hamlet! Gentlemen!
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag.
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear thyself? 
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocadile?
I'll do't. Dost [thou] come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou. This is mere madness,
And [thus] a while the fit will work on him;
Anon, as patient as the female dove,
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping. Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech,
We'll put the matter to the present push. --
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet [shortly] shall we see,
Till then in patience our proceeding be. 
So much for this, sir, now shall you see the other --
You do remember all the circumstance?
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. [Methought] I lay
Worse than the mutines in the [bilboes]. Rashly --
And praised be rashness for it -- let us know
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall, and that should learn us 
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will -- That is most certain. 
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them, had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold,
My fears forgetting manners, to [unseal]
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio --
Ah, royal knavery! -- an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With, ho, such bugs and goblins in my life,
That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,
My head should be strook off. Is't possible?
Here's the commission, read it at more leisure.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
Being thus benetted round with [villainies], 
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down, 
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair. 
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning, but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote? Ay, good my lord.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many such-like [as's] of great charge,
That on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed. How was this sealed?
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal; 
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
[Subscribed] it, gave't th' impression, placed it safely, 
The changeling never known. Now the next day 
Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
[Why, man, they did make love to this employment,]
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites. Why, what a king is this!
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon --
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such coz'nage -- is't not perfect conscience
To let this canker of our nature come
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there. 
It will be short; the interim's mine, 
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll [court] his favors.
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion. Peace, who comes here?
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
I [humbly] thank you, sir. -- Dost know this water-fly?
I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Nay, good my lord, for my case, in good faith.
The King and Queen and all are coming down.
Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. 
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a gentleman. 
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished 
With a sore distraction. What I have done 
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet!
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
Who does it then? His madness. If't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged,
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge, but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and president of peace 
To [keep] my name ungored. But [till] that time
I do receive your offered love like love, 
And will not wrong it. I embrace it freely,
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.
Give us the foils. [Come on.] Come, one for me.
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall like a star i' th' darkest night
Stick fiery off indeed. You mock me, sir.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager? Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds a' th' weaker side.
I do not fear it, I have seen you both;
But since he is [bettered], we have therefore odds.
This is too heavy; let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length? 
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
If Hamlet give the first or second hit, 
Or quit in answer of the third exchange, 
Let all the battlements their ord'nance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an [union] shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come begin;
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Come on, sir. Come, my lord. One. No. Judgment.
A hit, a very palpable hit. Well, again.
Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine,
I'll play this bout first, set it by a while.
Our son shall win. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
I will, my lord, I pray you pardon me.
It is the pois'ned cup, it is too late.
I dare not drink yet, madam; by and by.
My lord, I'll hit him now. I do not think't.
And yet it is almost against my conscience. 
I pray you pass with your best violence; 
I am sure you make a wanton of me.
Say you so? Come on. Nothing, neither way. 
Have at you now! Part them, they are incensed.
Nay, come again. Look to the Queen there ho!
They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric:
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
How does the Queen? She sounds to see them bleed.
No, no, the drink, the drink -- O my dear Hamlet -- 
O villainy! Ho, let the door be locked!
It is here, Hamlet. [Hamlet,] thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good; 
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in [thy] hand, 
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice 
Hath turned itself on me. Lo here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's pois'ned.
I can no more -- the King, the King's to blame.
Then, venom, to thy work. Treason! treason!
O, yet defend me, friends, I am but hurt.
Here, thou incestious, [murd'rous], damned Dane, 
Drink [off] this potion! Is [thy union] here?
Follow my mother! He is justly served,
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
You that look pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time -- as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest -- O, I could tell you --
But let it be. Horatio, I am dead, 
Thou livest. Report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied. Never believe it; 
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here's yet some liquor left. As th' art a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't!
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity a while,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story. What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, 
To th' embassadors of England gives
This warlike volley. O, I die, Horatio,
The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England,
But I do prophesy th' election lights 
On Fortinbras, he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents more and less 
Which have solicited -- the rest is silence. 
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
Where is this sight? What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast strook? The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead. 
Where should we have our thanks? Not from his mouth, 
Had it th' ability of life to thank you. 
He never gave commandement for their death.
But since so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to [th'] yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and [forced] cause,
And in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads: all this can I
Truly deliver. Let us haste to hear it,
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights, of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw [on] more. 
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance 
On plots and errors happen. Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldiers' music and the rite of war
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.
