<LLLVS> Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When spite of cormorant devouring Time,
Th' endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honor which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors -- for so you are,
And the huge army of the world's desires --
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force: 
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little academe, 
Still and contemplative in living art. 
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me,
My fellow scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are passed, and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honor down
That violates the smallest branch herein.
If you are armed to do, as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved, 'tis but a three years' fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine;
Fat paunches have lean pates; and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrout quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumaine is mortified:
The grosser manner of these world's delights
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
With all these living in philosophy.
I can but say their protestation over:
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn, 
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances: 
As not to see a woman in that term, 
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food,
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day --
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day --
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep.
Your oath is passed to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, and if you please:
I only swore to study with your Grace,
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know.
Why, that to know which else we should not know.
Things hid and barred (you mean) from common sense. 
Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Com' on then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus -- to study where I well may dine,
When I to [feast] expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
Study to break it and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why? all delights are vain, but that most vain
Which, with pain purchased, doth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upon a book
To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile; 
So ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes. 
Study me how to please the eye indeed 
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
That will not be deep searched with saucy looks;
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others' books.
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights,
That give a name to every fixed star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!                         
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
How follows that? Fit in his place and time. 
In reason nothing. Something then in rhyme.
Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Well, say I am, why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows;
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out; go home, Berowne; adieu.
No, my good lord, I have sworn to stay with you;                         
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet, confident, I'll keep what I have sworn,
And bide the penance of each three years' day. 
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name. 
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
within a mile of my court" -- Hath this been
losing her tongue."   Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I. Sweet lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
A dangerous law against gentility. 
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
For well you know here comes in embassy
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak --
A maid of grace and complete majesty -- 
About surrender up of Aquitaine
To her decrepit, sick, and bedred father; 
Therefore this article is made in vain, 
Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
What say you, lords?  Why, this was quite forgot.
So study evermore is overshot:
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to do the thing it should;
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
'Tis won as towns with fire -- so won, so lost.
We must of force dispense with this decree,
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years' space;
For every man with his affects is born,
Not by might mast'red, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
I am forsworn "on mere necessity."
So to the laws at large I write my name, 
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to other as to me; 
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath. 
But is there no quick recreation granted? 
Ay, that there is.  Our court you know is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain,
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One who the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpeer of their mutiny.
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high-borne words, the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain, lost in the world's debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport, 
And so to study three cars is but short.
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning
Will you hear this letter with attention?
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken 
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er,
And go we, lords, to put in practice that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
I'll lay my head to any good man's hat, 
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
It was so, sir, for she had a green wit.
My love is most immaculate white and red.
Define, define, well-educated infant.
My father's wit and my mother's tongue assist me!                         
I will tell thee wonders. With that face?
So I heard you say. And so farewell.
Take away this villain, shut him up.
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits;
Consider who the King your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye, 
Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues.
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
Than you much willing to be counted wise 
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court;
Therefore to 's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
[Importunes] personal conference with his Grace.
Haste, signify so much, while we attend,
Like humble[-visaged] suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords, 
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous Duke?
[Lord] Longaville is one.  Know you the man? 
I know him, madam; at a marriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville,
A man of sovereign [parts, peerless] esteemed,
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will,
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking lord belike, is't so?
They say so most that most his humors know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
The young Dumaine, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved; 
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good, 
And shape to win grace though he had no wit. 
I saw him at the Duke Alanson's once,
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour's talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet. Now, what admittance, lord?
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all addressed to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his [unpeopled] house.
Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre. 
"Fair" I give you back again, and "welcome"
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
I will be welcome then -- conduct me thither. 
Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it, will, and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your Grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner, that I were away,
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once? 
I know you did. How needless was it then
To ask the question? You must not be so quick. 
'Tis long of you that spur me with such questions. 
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
What time a' day? The hour that fools should ask.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he, or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied, 
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty. 
But that, it seems, he little purposeth: 
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns, and not demands,
[On] payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back,
Or yield up Aquitaine. We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances 
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father. Satisfy me so. 
So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound:
tomorrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me; at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Mean time receive such welcome at my hand
As honor (without breach of honor) may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
You may not come, fair Princess, within my gates,
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbor in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
tomorrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your Grace!
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
Lady, I will commend you to [mine own] heart.
Pray you, do my commendations -- I would 
I would you heard it groan. Is the fool sick?
Sick at the heart. Alack, let it blood.
Would that do it good? My physic says ay.
No point, with my knife. Now God save thy life!
And yours from long living! I cannot stay thanksgiving.
Sir, I pray you a word.  What lady is that same?
The heir of Alanson, [Katherine] her name.
A gallant lady.  Monsieur, fare you well.
I beseech you a word.  What is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, and you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light.  I desire her name.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
That last is Berowne, the merry madcap lord.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry. And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me Not so, gentle beast.
My lips are no common, though  several they be.
Belonging to whom?  To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling, but, gentles, agree:                          
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
If my observation (which very seldom lies),
By the heart's still rhetoric, disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With what? With that which we lovers entitle
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
His heart like an agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Methought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy, 
Who tend'ring their own worth from where they were glassed, 
Did point you to buy them, along as you passed; 
His face's own margent did cote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
Come to our pavilion -- Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclosed.
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skillfully.
He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
Fetch hither the swain, he must carry me a letter.
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that's he;
I shoot thee at the swain. Thump then, and I flee.   
By thy favor, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valor gives thee place.
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, and your goose be fat.
Fell over the threshold, and broke my shin.
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances!  I smell some
My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
I will never buy and sell out of this word.
As thou wilt win my favor, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
Well, I will do it, sir; fare you well.
I will come to your worship tomorrow morning.
The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady:
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
And to her white hand see thou do commend 
This sealed-up counsel. There's thy guerdon;  go.
A very beadle to a humorous sigh,
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable,
A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This senior[-junior], giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malecontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting paritors (O my little heart!),
And I to be a corporal of his field,
And wear his colors like a tumbler's hoop!
What!  I love, I sue, I seek a wife --
A woman, that is like a German [clock], 
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch, 
But being watched that it may still go right! 
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And among three to love the worst of all,
A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to!  It is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, groan:
Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.
Was that the King that spurred his horse so hard 
Against the steep uprising of the hill? 
I know not, but I think it was not he.
Whoe'er 'a was, 'a showed a mounting mind.
Well,  lords, today we shall have our dispatch;
[On] Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murtherer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what?  First praise me, and again say no?
O short-lived pride!  Not fair? alack for woe!
Yes, madam, fair. Nay, never paint me now;
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glass), take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words is more than due. 
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit. 
O  heresy in fair, fit for these days! 
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise' sake, when they strive to be
Only for praise -- and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
God dig-you-den all!  Pray you, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
And your waist, mistress, were as slender as 
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey; 
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play. 
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then? 
Food for his rage, repasture for his den."
This Armado is  a Spaniard that keeps here in court,
Who gave thee this letter? I told you: my lord.
To whom shouldst thou give it? From my lord to my lady.
From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he called Rosaline. 
Thou hast mistaken his letter.  Come, lords, away.
Why, she that bears the bow. Finely put off!
My lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on! Well then I am the shooter.
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
By my troth, most pleasant.   How both did fit it!
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit [it].
A mark!  O, mark but that mark! a mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
Wide a' the bow-hand!  I' faith, your hand is out.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the [pin].
Come, come, you talk greasily, your lips grow foul.
I fear too much rubbing.  Good night, my good owl.      
By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
I assure ye it was a buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo for a deer. 
'Twas not a haud credo, 'twas a pricket.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
God give you good morrow, Master Person.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse;
"So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.
Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep,
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show.
But do not love thyself, then thou [wilt] keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens, how far dost thou excel
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell."
How shall she know my griefs?  I'll drop the paper. 
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What, Longaville, and reading!  Listen, ear.
Now in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
In love, I hope -- sweet fellowship in shame.
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move. 
O sweet Maria, empress of my love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose! 
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
Disfigure not his shop. This same shall go. 
"Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee.
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gained cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapor is;
Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhal'st this vapor-vow; in thee it is.
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To lose an oath to win a paradise?"
A green goose a goddess; pure, pure [idolatry]. 
By whom shall I send this? -- Company? Stay.
"All hid, all hid," an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye.
More sacks to the mill!  O heavens, I have my wish!
Dumaine transformed! four woodcocks in a dish!
O most divine Kate! O most profane coxcomb!
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
Her amber hairs for foul hath amber coted.
An amber-colored raven was well noted.
As upright as the cedar. Stoop, I say,
Her shoulder is with child. As fair as day.
Ay, as some days, but then no sun must shine. 
O that I had my wish! And I had mine! 
I would forget her, but a fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will rememb'red be.
A fever in your blood! why then incision
Would let her out in saucers. Sweet misprision!
Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
This will I send and something else more plain
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
O would the King, Berowne, and Longaville
Were lovers too!  Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note:
For none offend where all alike do dote.
Dumaine, thy love is far from charity,
That in love's grief desir'st society:
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such;
You chide at him, offending twice as much. 
You do not love Maria?  Longaville 
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
"Ay me!" says one "O Jove!" the other cries;
You would for paradise break faith and troth,
And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy. 
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me! 
Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove 
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no [coaches;] in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears;
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed?  Nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
You found his mote, the King your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of fool'ry have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Salomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumaine?
And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? All about the breast! 
A caudle ho! Too bitter is thy jest. 
Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view? 
Not you by me, but I betrayed to you:
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men like [you], men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme,
Or groan for Joan, or spend a minute's time
In pruning me?  When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb -- Soft, whither away so fast?
A true man, or a thief, that gallops so?
I post from love; good lover, let me go.
God bless the King! What present hast thou there?
Some certain treason.  What makes treason here?
The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your Grace let this letter be read:
Our person misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.
Berowne, read it over. Where hadst thou it?
How now, what is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
It is Berowne's writing, and here is his name.
Guilty, my lord, guilty!  I confess, I confess.
He, he, and you -- and you, my liege! -- and I,
Will these turtles be gone? Hence, sirs, away!
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.  
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline, 
That (like a rude and savage man of Inde),
At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east, 
Bows not his vassal head, and strooken blind, 
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury, hath inspired thee now?
My love (her mistress) is a gracious moon,
She (an attending star) scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the culled sovereignty
Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues --
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not.
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs:
She passes praise, then praise too short doth blot.
A withered hermit, fivescore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye: 
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new born,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy. 
O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine! 
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O [wood] divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath?  Where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
O paradox!  Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
O, if in black my lady's brows be decked,
It mourns that painting [and] usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow. 
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black. 
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiops of their sweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colors should be washed away.
'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer face not washed today.
I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love my foot and her face see.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
O vile! then as she goes what upward lies
The street should see as she walked overhead. 
But what of this, are we not all in love?
O, nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn. 
Then leave this chat, and, good Berowne, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Ay marry, there -- some flattery for this evil.
O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.  O, 'tis more than need.
Have at you then, affection's men-at-arms. 
Consider what you first did swear unto: 
To fast, to study, and to see no woman --
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast?  Your stomachs are too young,
And abstinence engenders maladies.
(And where that you have vowed to study, lords,
In that each of you have forsworn his book,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of study's excellence
Without the beauty of a woman's face?
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
They are the ground, the books, the academes,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
Why, universal plodding poisons up
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long-during action tires
The sinowy vigor of the traveller.
Now for not looking on a woman's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,
And study too, the causer of your vow. 
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye? 
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself, 
And where we are, our learning likewise is.
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
Do we not likewise see our learning there?)
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enriched you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
And therefore, finding barren practicers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain,
But with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye: 
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind.
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound, 
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped. 
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails.
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
For valor, is not Love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtile as Sphinx, as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair.
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were temp'red with Love's sighs:
O then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain, and nourish all the world,
Else none at all in aught proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools. 
For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men, 
Or for men's sake, the [authors] of these women, 
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
[Let] us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn:
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing, lay these glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them too; therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them, 
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours 
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers. 
Away, away, no time shall be omitted
That will be time, and may by us be fitted.
And justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.    
What is the figure? What is the figure? Horns. 
Thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.
Most dull, honest Dull! to our sport; away!
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A lady walled about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving King.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this?  Yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper,
Writ a' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
Ay, and a shrowd unhappy gallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him, 'a killed your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy,
And so she died.  Had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit, 
She might 'a' been [a] grandam ere she died.
And so may you; for a light heart lives long. 
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not?  O, that's you care not for me.
Great reason:  for past care is still past cure.
Well bandied both, a set of wit well played.
But, Rosaline, you have a favor too?
Who sent it? and what is it? I would you knew.
And if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favor were as great: be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne; 
The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground. 
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs. 
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink -- a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
Ware pencils [ho]!  let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter:
O that your face were not so full of O's!
A pox of that jest! and I beshrow all shrows.
But, Katherine, what was sent to you from fair
Madam, this glove. Did he not send you twain?
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover.
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vildly compiled, profound simplicity.
This, and these [pearls], to me sent Longaville. 
The letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less.  Dost thou not wish in heart 
The chain were longer and the letter short? 
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
And shape his service wholly to my device,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So pair-taunt-like would I o'ersway his state
That he should be my fool and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catched,
As wit turned fool; folly, in wisdom hatched,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess 
As gravity's revolt to [wantonness].
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note 
As fool'ry in the wise, when wit doth dote, 
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
O, I am [stabbed] with laughter!  Where's her Grace?
Thy news, Boyet? Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
Against your peace.  Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments -- you'll be surprised.
Muster your wits, stand in your own defense,
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us?  Say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When lo, to interrupt my purposed rest, 
Toward that shade I might behold addressed
The King and his companions. Warily 
I stole into a neighbor thicket by, 
And overheard what you shall overhear:
That by and by disguised [they] will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath conned his embassage.
Action and accent did they teach him there:
"Thus must thou speak," and "thus thy body bear",
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out;
"For," quoth the King,"an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously."
The boy replied, "An angel is not evil;
I should have feared her had she been a devil."
With that all laughed, and clapped him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elbow thus, and fleered, and swore
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another, with his finger and his thumb,
Cried,"Via! we will do't, come what will come."
The third he capered, and cried, "All goes well."
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell. 
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound, 
That in this spleen ridiculous appears, 
To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
They do, they do; and are apparelled thus,
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, to court, and dance,
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
By favors several which they did bestow.
And will they so?  The gallants shall be tasked:
For, ladies, we will every one be masked,
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favor thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his dear.
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change you favors too, so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on then, wear the favors most in sight. 
But in this changing, what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs: 
They do it but in mockery merriment, 
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mocked withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke each turn away [her] face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt
The rest will [ne'er] come in, if he be out.
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own;
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mocked, depart away with shame.
The trumpet sounds, be masked; the maskers come.
"All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!" -- 
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
"A holy parcel of the fairest dames
That ever turned their -- backs -- to mortal views!",
"That [ever] turned their eyes to mortal views!
"Out of your favors, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold" -- "Once to behold," rogue.
"Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
They will not answer to that epithet;
You were best call it "daughter-beamed eyes."
They do not mark me, and that brings me out. 
Is this your perfectness?  Be gone, you rogue!
What would these strangers?  Know their minds, Boyet.
If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would. What would you with the Princess?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Why, that they have, and bid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her we have measured many miles,
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so.  Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
The measure then of one is eas'ly told. 
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the Princess bids you tell 
How many inches doth fill up one mile. 
Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.
She hears herself. How many weary steps
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you;
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without accompt.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we (like savages) may worship it.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine
(Those clouds removed) upon our watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter,
Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg; this begging is not strange. 
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
Not yet; no dance: thus change I like the moon. 
Will you not dance?  How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it. But your legs should do it.
Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,
We'll  not be nice; take hands. We will not dance.
Why take we hands then? Only to part friends.
Curtsy, sweet hearts -- and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Price you yourselves; what buys your company?
Your absence only. That can never be. 
Then cannot we be bought; and so, adieu --
Twice to your visor, and half once to you. 
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat. 
In private then. I am best pleased with that.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar: there is three.
Nay then two treys, and if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run, dice!
There's half a dozen sweets. Seventh sweet, adieu.
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
One word in secret. Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall. Gall! bitter.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.  Fair lady -- Say you so?  Fair lord -- 
Take that for your fair lady.  Please it you,
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
O for your reason! quickly, sir, I long!
You have a double tongue within your mask, 
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
"Veal,"  quoth the Dutchman. Is  not veal a calf?
A calf, fair lady! No, a fair lord calf.
Let's part the word. No, I'll not be your half.
Take all and wean it, it may prove an ox.
Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns, chaste lady?  Do not so. 
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow. 
One word in private with you ere I die. 
Bleat softly then, the butcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen;
Above the sense of sense, so sensible
Seemeth their conference, their conceits have wings
Not one word more, my maids, break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches, you have simple wits.     
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puffed out.
Well-liking wits they have -- gross gross, fat fat. 
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not (think you) hang themselves tonight? 
Or ever but in vizards show their faces? 
This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
They were all in lamentable cases!
The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.
Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
Dumaine was at my service, and his sword:
"No point," quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart,
And trow you what he called me? Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith. Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? the King is my love sworn.
And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Dumaine is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes; for it can never be 
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?  They will, they will, God knows, 
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change favors, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Fair ladies masked are roses in their bud;
Dismasked, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels [vailing] clouds, or roses blown.
Avaunt, perplexity!  What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's mock them still, as well known as disguised.
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vildly penned,
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes [run] o'er land. 
Fair sir, God save you!  Where's the Princess?
Gone to her tent.  Please it your Majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will, and so will she, I know, my lord.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
And utters it again when God doth please.
He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs:
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
'A can carve too, and lisp; why, this is he
That kissed his hand away in courtesy; 
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
That when he plays at tables chides the dice 
In honorable terms; nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly, and in hushering
Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet;
The stairs as he treads on them kiss his feet. 
This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone; 
And consciences that will not die in debt 
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page out of his part!
See where it comes!  Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman showed thee?  And what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
"Fair" in "all hail" is foul, as I conceive.
Conster my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better, I will give you leave.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke: 
The virtue of your eye must break my oath. 
You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke,
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure
As the unsallied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house's guest:
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Not so, my lord, it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game,
A  mess of Russians left us but of late.
How, madam?  Russians? Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
My lady (to the manner of the days)
In courtesy gives undeserving praise. 
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour, 
And talked apace; and in that hour, my lord, 
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish. When we greet,
With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light; your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish, and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye --
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
All the fool mine? I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this? 
There then, that vizard, that superfluous case, 
That hid the worse, and showed the better face. 
We were descried, they'll mock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord?  Why looks your Highness sad?
Help, hold his brows, he'll sound!  Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I, lady, dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penned,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song! 
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affection, 
Figures pedantical -- these summer flies 
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white glove (how white the hand, God knows!),
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes.
And to begin, wench, so God help me law!
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans "sans," I pray you. Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage. Bear with me, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see --
Write "Lord have mercy on us" on those three:
They are infected, in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
These lords are visited; you are not free,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit, seek not to undo us. 
It is not so, for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue? 
Peace, for I will not have to do with you. 
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves, my wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse. The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now, disguised?
Madam, I was. And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam. When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Upon mine honor, no. Peace, peace, forbear:
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine. 
I will, and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear? 
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear 
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
God give thee joy of him!  The noble lord
Most honorably doth uphold his word.
What mean you, madam?  By my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
My faith and this the Princess I did give;
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne (I thank him) is my dear.
What? will you have me, or your pearl again?
Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick an't; here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany, 
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick, 
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favors; and then we,
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
Much upon this 'tis;  and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out. Go, you are allowed;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you?  There's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword. Full merrily
Hath this brave [manage], this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace, I have done. 
Welcome, pure wit, thou part'st a fair fray.
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
That sport best pleases that doth [least] know how:
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents. 
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things laboring perish in their mirth.   
A right description of our sport, my lord.
"I Pompey am" -- You lie, you are not he.
"I Pompey am" -- With libbard's head on knee.
"I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big" --                         
It is "Great," sir. "Pompey surnamed the Great,
"Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club killed Cerberus, that three-headed canus.
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
Ergo I come with this apology."
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
"Judas I am, ycliped Machabeus."
Judas Machabeus clipt is plain Judas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
"Judas I am" -- The more shame for you, Judas.
What mean you, sir? To make Judas hang himself.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
I will not be put out of countenance. 
Because thou hast no face. What is this?
A cittern-head. The head of a bodkin.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
You have put me out of countenance.
And thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Therefore as he is, an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude!  Nay, why dost thou stay?
For the ass to the Jude; give it him. Judas, away!
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble. 
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
"The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty, 
Gave Hector a gift" -- A [gilt] nutmeg. 
A lemon. Stuck with cloves. No, cloven. Peace! -- 
"The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight, yea,
From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
I am that flower" --That mint. That columbine.
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper.
"This Hector far surmounted Hannibal.
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt;
But that thou interruptest our merriment.
I am sorry, madam, for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue.  The King your father --
Dead, for my life! Even so:  my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud. 
Boyet, prepare, I will away tonight.
Madam, not so, I do beseech you stay.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavors, and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse, or hide,
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If overboldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath -- your gentleness
Was guilty of it.  Farewell, worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtained.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often, at his very loose, decides
That which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny 
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince, 
Yet since love's argument was first on foot, 
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purposed; since to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
I understand you not, my griefs are double.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief,
And by these badges understand the King.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths.  Your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our intents;
And what in us hath seemed ridiculous --
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formed by the eye and therefore like the eye,
Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance;
Which parti-coated presence of loose love 
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities, 
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults, 
Suggested us to make.  Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false,
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both -- fair ladies, you;
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love;
Your favors, embassadors of love;
And in our maiden council rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time;
But more devout than this [in] our respects
Have we not been, and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, showed much more than jest. 
So did our looks. We did not cote them so.
Now at the latest minute of the hour, 
Grant us your loves. A time methinks too short 
To make a world-without-end bargain in. 
No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness, and therefore this:
If for my love (as there is no such cause)
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love
But that it bear this trial, and last love;
Then at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
I will be thine; and till that [instant] shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part, 
Neither intitled in the other's heart. 
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence [hermit] then -- my heart is in thy breast.
And what to me, my love? and what to me?
You must be purged too, your sins are racked,
You are attaint with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favor mean to get,
A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
But seek the weary beds of people sick.)
But what to me, my love? but what to me?
A wife? A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With threefold love I wish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord, a twelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say.
Come when the King doth to my lady come;
Then if I have much love, I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then. 
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
What says Maria?  At the twelvemonth's end
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
I'll stay with patience, but the time is long.
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there.
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fructful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit, 
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death? 
It cannot be, it is impossible: 
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it; then if sickly ears,
Deafed with the clamors of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
A twelvemonth?  Well, befall what will befall, 
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
Ay, sweet my lord, and  so I take my leave.
No, madam, we will bring you on your way. 
Our wooing doth not end like an old play:
Jack hath not Gill. These ladies' courtesy 
Might  well have made our sport a comedy. 
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
And then 'twill end. That's too long for a play.
Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me -- Was not that Hector?
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave.
