<LRvs> Mean time we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
In three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburthened crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The princes, France and
Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answered. Tell me, my daughters
(Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state),
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend 
Where nature doth with merit challenge? Goneril,
Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty,
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor;
As much as child e'er loved, or father found;
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable:
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains riched,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.
I am made of that self metal as my sister,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
I find she names my very deed of love;
Only she comes too short, that I profess 
Myself an enemy to all other joys
Which the most precious square of sense possesses, 
And find I am alone felicitate 
In your dear Highness' love.   Then poor Cordelia!
And yet not so, since I am sure my love's
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
Than that conferred on Goneril. -- Now, our joy,
Although our last and least, to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
A third more opulent than your sisters'? Speak.
Nothing will come of nothing, speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
According to my bond, no more nor less.
How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Lest you may mar your fortunes.  Good my lord, 
You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I
Return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honor you.
Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
They love you all? Happily, when I shall wed,
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
Let it be so: thy truth then be thy dow'r!
For by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecat and the night;
By all the operation of the orbs,
From whom we do exist and cease to be;
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood, 
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian, 
Or he that makes his generation messes 
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved,
As thou my sometime daughter.  Good my liege --
Come not between the dragon and his wrath;
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery.  Hence, and avoid my sight! --
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Her father's heart from her. Call France. Who stirs?
Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,
With my two daughters' dow'rs digest the third;
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain 
The name, and all th' addition to a king;
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest, 
Beloved sons, be yours, which to confirm, 
This coronet part between you.  Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honored as my king,
Loved as my father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers --
The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
When Lear is mad. What wouldest thou do, old man?
Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sounds
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thine enemies, ne'er feared to lose it, 
Thy safety being motive.  Out of my sight!
See better, Lear, and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.   Now, by Apollo --
Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.   O vassal! miscreant
Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat,
I'll tell thee thou dost evil.  Hear me, recreant,
That thou hast sought to make us break our vow --
Which we durst never yet -- and with strained pride
To come betwixt our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward. 
Five days we do allot thee, for provision
To shield thee from disasters of the world, 
And on the sixt to turn thy hated back 
Upon our kingdom. If, on the tenth day following,
Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
Fare thee well, King; sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu,
He'll shape his old course in a country new.   
Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
We first address toward you, who with this king
Hath rivalled for our daughter. What, in the least, 
Will you require in present dower with her, 
Or cease your quest of love?  Most royal Majesty,
I crave no more than hath your Highness offered,
Nor will you tender less.  Right noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so,
But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands:
If aught within that little seeming substance,
Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,
And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace, 
She's there, and she is yours.  I know no answer. 
Will you, with those infirmities she owes, 
Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dowered with our curse, and strangered with our oath,
Take her, or leave her?  Pardon me, royal sir,
Election makes not up in such conditions.
Then leave her, sir, for by the pow'r that made me,
I tell you all her wealth.  For you, great  King,
I would not from your love make such a stray
To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
T' avert your liking a more worthier way
Than on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed
Almost t' acknowledge hers.  This is most strange,
That she, whom even but now was your best object,
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
So many folds of favor. Sure her offense 
Must be of such unnatural degree
That monsters it, or your fore-vouched affection 
Fall into taint; which to believe of her 
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
If for I want that glib and oily art
I'll do't before I speak -- that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
No unchaste action, or dishonored step,
That hath deprived me of your grace and favor,
But even for want of that for which I am richer --
A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
That I am glad I have not, though not to have it
Hath lost me in your liking.  Better thou
Hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me better.
Is it but this -- a tardiness in nature
Which often leaves the history unspoke
That it intends to do? My Lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the lady? Love's not love
When it is mingled with regards that stands 
Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.  Royal King, 
Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Nothing. I have sworn, I am firm.
I am sorry then you have so lost a father
Since that respects of fortune are his love,
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor,
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon,
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
My love should kindle to inflamed respect.
Thy dow'rless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
Not all the dukes of wat'rish Burgundy
Can buy this unprized precious maid of me. 
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind,
Thou losest here, a better where to find. 
Thou hast her, France, let her be thine, for we
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again.  Therefore be gone,
Without our grace, our love, our benison. --
Come, noble Burgundy.  Bid farewell to your sisters.
The jewels of our father, with washed eyes
Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,
And like a sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are named. Love well our father;
To your professed bosoms I commit him,
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place.
Prescribe not us our duty.  Let your study
Be to content your lord, who hath received you 
At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the want that you have wanted. 
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who covers faults, at last with shame derides.
Well may you prosper!  Come, my fair Cordelia.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess, to thy law
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
Lag of a brother? Why bastard? Wherefore base?
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us 
With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take 
More composition, and fierce quality, 
Than doth within a dull, stale, tired bed
Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops,
Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
As to th' legitimate. Fine word, "legitimate" !
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
Shall top th' legitimate. I grow, I prosper:
Kent banished thus? and France in choler parted?
And the King gone tonight? Prescribed his pow'r,
Confined to exhibition? All this done
Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? what news?
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter? 
What paper were you reading?  Nothing, my lord. 
I do serve you in this business. 
A credulous father and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms
That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy. I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth. have lands by wit:
All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.    
By day and night he wrongs me, every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other
That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him; say I am sick.
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
Put on what weary negligence you please, 
You and your fellows; I'd have it come to question. 
If he distaste it, let him to my sister,
Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
Not to be overruled. Idle old man,
That still would manage those authorities
That he hath given away! Now by my life
Old fools are babes again, and must be used
With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused.
And let his knights have colder looks among you;
What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent 
May carry through itself to that full issue
For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent, 
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned, 
So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
Not only, sir, this your all-licensed Fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir, 
I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful, 
By what yourself too late have spoke and done, 
That you protect this course and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Might in their working do you that offense,
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.   For you know, nuncle,
"The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so lone,
That it had it head bit off by it young."
So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
I would you would make use of your good wisdom
(Whereof I know you are fraught) and put away
These dispositions which of late transport you
May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
Does any here know me? This is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes? 
Either his notion weakens, his discernings 
Are lethargied -- Ha! waking? 'Tis not so.
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
I would learn that, for by the marks of sovereignty,
Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
Which they will make an obedient father.
This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savor
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright,
As you are old and reverend, should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,
Men so disordered, so deboshed and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
For instant remedy. Be then desired 
By her, that else will take the thing she begs,
A little to disquantity your train, 
And the remainders that shall still depend, 
To be such men as may besort your age,
Which know themselves and you.  Darkness and devils!
Saddle my horses; call my train together!
Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
Yet have I left a daughter.  You strike my people,
Woe, that too late repents! -- O, sir, are you come?
Is it your will? Speak, sir. -- Prepare my horses. --
Ingratitude! thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
Pray, sir, be patient.  Detested kite, thou liest.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know, 
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault, 
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show! 
Which, like an engine, wrenched my frame of nature
From the fixed place; drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in
And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
My lord, I am guiltless as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.  It may be so, my lord.
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
Into her womb convey sterility,
Dry up in her the organs of increase,
And from her derogate body never spring
A babe to honor her! If she must teem,
Create her child of spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, 
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
Turn all her mother's pains and benefits 
To laughter and contempt, that she may feel 
How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
To have a thankless child! -- Away, away!    
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
Never afflict yourself to know more of it,
But let his disposition have that scope
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?  What's the matter, sir?
I'll tell thee.  Life and death! I am ashamed
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out, 
And cast you, with the waters that you loose,
To temper clay. Yea, is't come to this? 
Ha? let it be so: I have another daughter, 
Who I am sure is kind and comfortable.
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She'll flea thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
I have cast off for ever.  Do you mark that?
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
This man hath had good counsel -- a hundred  knights! 
'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, 
He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs,
And hold our lives in mercy. -- Oswald, I say!
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
What he hath uttered I have writ my sister;
If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
When I have showed th' unfitness -- How now, Oswald?
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
Take you some company, and away to horse.
Inform her full of my particular fear,
And thereto add such reasons of your own
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And hasten your return.  No, no, my lord, 
This milky gentleness and course of yours
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon, 
You are much more attaxed for want of wisdom 
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell:
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
You may do then in time. Fare you well, sir.
The Duke be here tonight? The better! best!
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother,
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!
Brother, a word! Descend. Brother, I say!
My father watches: O sir, fly this place,
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night.
Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall? 
He's coming hither, now i' th' night, i' th' haste,
And Regan with him. Have you nothing said 
Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany? 
Advise yourself.  I am sure on't, not a word.
I hear my father coming. Pardon me:
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
Draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well. --
Yield! Come before my father. Light ho, here! --
Fly, brother. -- Torches, torches! -- So farewell.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavor. I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport. -- Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?  Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand 's auspicious mistress.  But where is he? 
Look, sir, I bleed.  Where is the villain, Edmund? 
Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could --
Pursue him, ho! Go after.  By no means what?
Persuade me to the murther of your lordship,
But that I told him, the revengive gods
'Gainst parricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to th' father; sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared sword he charges home
My unprovided body, latched mine arm;
And when he saw my best alarumed spirits,
Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to th' encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.  Let him fly far.
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
And found -- dispatch. The noble Duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight. 
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks, 
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake; 
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
I threatened to discover him; he replied,
"Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faithed? No. What I should deny
(As this I would, ay, though thou didst produce
My very character), I'ld turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice;
And thou must make a dullard of the world
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spirits
To make thee seek it."  O strange and fast'ned villain!
Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes. 
All ports I'll bar, the villain shall not scape;
The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture 
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom 
May have due note of him, and of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
How now, my noble friend? since I came hither
(Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
O madam, my old heart is cracked, it's cracked!
What, did my father's godson seek your life?
He whom my father named, your Edgar?
O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad.
Yes, madam, he was of that consort. 
No marvel then, though he were ill affected:
'Tis they have put him on the old man's death, 
To have th' expense and waste of his revenues. 
I have this present evening from my sister
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
I'll not be there.  Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A child-like office. It was my duty, sir.
He did bewray his practice, and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
You we first seize on.  I shall serve you, sir, 
You know not why we came to visit you? 
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some prize,
Wherein we must have use of your advice.
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
Your needful counsel to our businesses,
Which craves the instant use. I serve you, madam.
Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain 
Which are t' intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
That in the natures of their lords rebel, 
Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods; 
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing nought (like dogs) but following.
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, and I had you upon Sarum plain,
I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
No contraries hold more antipathy
Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.  This is some fellow
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect 
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb 
Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
And they will take't, so; if not, he's plain.
These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness
Harbor more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly-ducking observants
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flick'ring Phoebus' front -- What mean'st by this?
It pleased the King his master very late 
To strike at me upon his misconstruction,
When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure, 
Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed, 
And put upon him such a deal of man
That worthied him, got praises of the King
For him attempting who was self-subdued,
And in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
But Ajax is their fool. Fetch forth the stocks!
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
We'll teach you.  Sir, I am too old to learn.
Call not your stocks for me, I serve the King,
On whose employment I was sent to you.
You shall do small respects, show too bold malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honor,
Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too.
Why, madam, if I were your father's dog, 
This is a fellow of the self-same color
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
His fault is much, and the good King his master
Will check him for't. Your purposed low correction
Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches
For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
Are punished with. The King must take it ill
That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.  I'll answer that.
My sister may receive it much more worse
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.
I am sorry for thee, friend, 'tis the Duke's pleasure,
Whose disposition, all the world well knows, 
Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I'll entreat for thee. 
Pray do not, sir. I have watched and travelled hard:
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
The Duke's to blame in this, 'twill be ill taken.         
Good King, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informed
Of my obscured course; " -- and shall find time
From this enormous state -- seeking to give
Losses their remedies." -- All weary and o'erwatched,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold 
Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel. 
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place
That guard and most unusual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape
I will preserve myself, and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury, in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast. My face I'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, elf all my hairs in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and president
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numbed and mortified arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills, 
Sometimes with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.  
'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my messenger.  As I learned,
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.  Hail to thee, noble master!
Mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?  No, my lord.
By Juno, I swear ay.  They durst not do't;
They could not, would not do't. 'Tis worse than murther
To do upon respect such violent outrage.
Resolve me with all modest haste which way
Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,
Coming from us.  My lord, when at their home
I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth 
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Delivered letters, spite of intermission, 
Which presently they read; on those contents 
They summoned up their meiny, straight took horse,
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks:
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine --
Being the very fellow which of late
Displayed so saucily against your Highness --
Having more man than wit about me, drew.
He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.  My dear lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How unremovable and fixed he is
Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife. 
Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.
Informed them? Dost thou understand me, man? 
The King would speak with Cornwall, the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends service.
Are they informed of this? My breath and blood!
Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that --
No, but not yet, may be he is not well:
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves
When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind
To suffer with the body. I'll forbear,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit
For the sound man.  Death on my state! wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the Duke, and 's wife, I'ld speak with them -- 
Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum 
O me, my heart! my rising heart! But down!
Good morrow to you both.   Hail to your Grace!
Regan, I think you are; I know what  reason
I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
Sepulchring an adult'ress.  O, are you free?
Some other time for that.  Beloved Regan,
Thy sister's naught. O Regan, she hath tied 
Sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here.
I can scarce speak to thee; thou'lt not believe 
With how depraved a quality -- O Regan!
I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty. Say? How is that?
I cannot think my sister in the least
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
She have restrained the riots of your followers,
'Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end
My curses on her!   O sir, you are old,
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of his confine. You should be ruled and led
By some discretion that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you
That to our sister you do make return.
Say you have wronged her.   Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house! 
"Dear daughter, I confess that I am old; 
Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg 
That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food." 
Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks.
Return you to my sister.  Never, Regan:
She hath abated me of half my train;
Looked black upon me, strook me with her tongue,
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!   Fie sir fie!
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! infect her beauty,
You fen-sucked fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
To fall and blister!  O the blest gods! so
Will you wish on me, when the rash mood is on.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee o'er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but thine 
Do comfort, and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, 
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes, 
And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know'st
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude:
Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowed.  Good sir, to th' purpose.
Who put my man i' th' stocks?   What trumpet's that?
I know't, my sister's. This approves her letter,
That she would soon be here.  Is your lady come?
This is a slave whose easy-borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!  What means your Grace?
Who stocked my servant? Regan, I have good hope 
Thou didst not know on't. Who comes here? O heavens!
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if you yourselves are old,
Make it your cause; send down, and take my part.
Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
O Regan, will you take her by the hand?
Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
All's not offense that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.  O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold? How came my man i' th, stocks?
I set him there, sir; but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement.  You? Did you?
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If till the expiration of your month
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
I am now from home, and out of that provision 
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her? and fifty men dismissed? 
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose 
To wage against the enmity o' th' air,
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl --
Necessity's sharp pinch. Return with her?
Why, the hot-bloodied France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and squire-like, pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.   At your choice, sir.
I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.
I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter --
Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a bile,
A plague-sore, or embossed carbuncle,
In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee,
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it.
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot, 
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
Mend when thou canst, be better at thy leisure, 
I can be patient, I can stay with Regan, 
I looked not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister,
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so --
But she knows what she does.  Is this well spoken?
I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many? sith that both charge and danger
Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
Should many people under two commands
Hold amity? 'Tis hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants or from mine?
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack ye,
We could control them. If you will come to me 
(For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
To bring but five and twenty; to no more 
Will I give place or notice.  I gave you all --
Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five and twenty? Regan, said you so?
And speak't again, my lord, no more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favored
When others are more wicked; not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise.  I'll go  with thee,
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her love.  Hear me, my lord:
What need you five and twenty? ten? or five?
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?   What need one? 
O, reason not the need! our basest beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man's life is cheap as beast's. Thou art a lady;
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But for true need -- 
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need! 
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
As full of grief as age, wretched in both.
If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
And let not women's weapons, water-drops,
Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both
That all the world shall -- I will do such things --
What they are yet I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the earth! You think I'll weep:
I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere I'll weep. O Fool, I shall go mad!
This house is little, the old man and 's people
'Tis his own blame hath put himself from rest,
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly, 
But not one follower.  So am I purposed.
He is returned.  The King is in high rage.
He calls to horse, but will I know not  whither.
'Tis best to give him way, he leads himself.
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
There's scarce a bush.  O sir, to willful men,
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
He is attended with a desperate train, 
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear. 
Shut up your doors, my lord, 'tis a wild night,
My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
That things might change or cease, tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyeless rage
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of,
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, 
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs, 
And bids what will take all.)  But who is with him?
None but the Fool, who labors to outjest
His heart-strook injuries.  Sir, I do know you,
And dare upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
(Although as yet the face of it is covered
With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
Who have -- as who have not, that their great stars
Throned and set high? -- servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne
Against the old kind King; or something deeper,
Whereof (perchance) these are but furnishings --
But true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scattered kingdom, who already
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports, and are at point 
To show their open banner. Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far 
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find 
Some that will thank you, making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
And from some knowledge and assurance, offer
I will talk further with you.  No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia
(As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
And she will tell you who that fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
Few words, but to effect, more than all yet:
That when we have found the King -- in which your pain 
That way, I'll this -- he that first lights on him
Blow, winds, and crack your checks! rage, blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the cocks!
You sulph'rous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world!
Crack nature's moulds, all germains spill at once
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! Spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
I never gave you kingdom, called you children; 
You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave, 
A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man; 
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That will with two pernicious daughters join
Your high-engendered battles 'gainst a head
So old and white as this. O, ho! 'tis foul.
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Th' affliction nor the fear.  Let the great gods,
That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch
That hast within thee undivulged crimes
Unwhipt of justice! Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
Thou perjured, and thou simular of virtue
That art incestuous! Caitiff, to pieces shake,
That under covert and convenient seeming
Has practiced on man's life! Close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents, and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinned against than sinning.  Alack, bare-headed?
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel, 
Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest. 
Repose you there, while I to this hard house
(More harder than the stones where of 'tis raised,
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in) return, and force
Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange
And can make vild things precious. Come, your hovel.
Poor Fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
This is a brave night to cool a courtezan. 
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
Instantly know, and of that letter too.
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses: no less than all.
The younger rises when the old doth fall.  
Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter,
The tyranny of the open night's too rough 
For nature to endure.   Let me alone.
Good my lord, enter here.  Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin; so 'tis to thee;
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'dst shun a bear,
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
Thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the mind's free,
The body's delicate; this tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else,
Save what beats there -- filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to't? But I will punish home.
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out? Pour on, I will endure. 
In such a night as this? O Regan, Goneril!
Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all -- 
O, that way madness lies, let me shun that! 
No more of that.   Good my lord, enter here.
Prithee go in thyself, seek thine own ease.
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
In, boy, go first. -- You houseless poverty --
Nay, get thee in; I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp,
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,
Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom! 
Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. 
Help me, help me! Give me thy hand. Who's there?
A spirit, a spirit! he says his name's poor Tom.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Go in with me; my duty cannot suffer 
T' obey in all your daughters' hard commands.
Though their injunction be to bar my doors, 
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you, 
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
Good my lord, take his offer, go into th' house.
I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
Importune him once more to go, my lord,
His wits begin t' unsettle.  Canst thou blame him? 
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banished man.
Thou sayest the King grows mad, I'll tell thee, friend,
I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
Now outlawed from my blood; he sought my life,
But lately, very late. I loved him, friend, 
No father his son dearer; true to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this! 
I do beseech your Grace -- O, cry you mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.
In, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
Come, let's in all.  This way, my lord.  With him;
I will keep still with my philosopher.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
Come, good Athenian.  No words, no words, hush.
Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
Cry you mercy, I took you for a join-stool.
And here's another, whose warped looks proclaim
What store her heart is made an. Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
That you so oft have boasted to retain?
My tears begin to take his part so much,
Come hither, friend; where is the King my master?
Here, sir, but trouble him not -- his wits are gone.
Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms; 
I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
There is a litter ready, lay him in't, 
And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet 
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master;
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.  Oppressed nature sleeps.
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure.  Come help to bear thy master;
Thou must not stay behind.  Come, come, away.
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers, suffers most i' th' mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind,
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip,
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship. 
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the King bow: 
He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe scape the King!
My Lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
Are gone with him toward Dover, where they boast
To have well-armed friends.  Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.  Edmund, farewell.
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control.  Who's there? The traitor? 
What means your Graces? Good my friends, consider
You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.
Bind him, I say.  Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find --   
By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
So white and such a traitor?  Naughty lady,
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host,
With robber's hands my hospitable favors
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France? 
Be simple-answered, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors 
To whose hands you have sent the lunatic King --
I have a letter guessingly set down,
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.  Cunning.  And false.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril --
Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.
I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh rash boarish fangs. 
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up 
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howled that dearn time,
Thou shouldst have said, "Good porter, turn the key."
All cruels else subscribe; but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.
See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair,
Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods!
One side will mock another; th' other too.
If you see vengeance -- Hold your hand, my lord!
I have served you ever since I was a child;
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.  How now, you dog?
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I'ld shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
Nay then come on, and take the chance of anger.   
Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus? 
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vild jelly!
All dark and comfortless! Where's my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,
To quit this horrid act.  Out, treacherous villain!
Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us,
O my follies! then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.  How is't, my lord? How look you? 
I have received a hurt; follow me, lady. --
Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave 
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace, 
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
I'll never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.  If she live long,
And in the end meet the old course of death, 
Let's follow the old Earl, and get the Bedlam 
To lead him where he would; his roguish madness
Go thou. I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace:
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts.  But who comes here?
My father, parti-eyed? World, world, O world! 
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.  O my good lord, 
I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.  You cannot see your way.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seen,
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused father's wrath!
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I'ld say I had eyes again.  How now? who's there?
O gods! Who is't can say, "I am at the worst"?
I am worse than e'er I was. 'Tis poor mad Tom.
And worse I may be yet: the worst is not
So long as we can say, "This is the worst." 
Fellow, where goest?  Is it a beggar-man?
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
Which made me think a man a worm. My son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods,
They kill us for their sport.  How should this be?
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Ang'ring itself and others. -- Bless thee, master!
Is that the naked fellow?  Ay, my lord.
Then prithee get thee away. If for my sake
Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked soul, 
'Tis the time's plague, when madmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
Poor Tom's a-cold.  I cannot daub it further.
And yet I must. -- Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heav'ns' plagues 
Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched 
Makes thee the happier; heavens, deal so still!
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your pow'r quickly;
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me. From that place
I shall no leading need.  Give me thy arm;
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way. Now, where's your master? 
Madam, within, but never man so changed. 
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smiled at it. I told him you were coming;
His answer was, "The worse." Of Gloucester's treachery,
And of the loyal service of his son,
When I informed him, then he called me sot,
And told me I had turned the wrong side out.
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.  Then shall you go no further.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit
That dares not undertake; he'll not feel wrongs
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother,
Hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs.
I must change names at home, and give the distaff
Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear
(If you dare venture in your own behalf) 
A mistress's command. Wear this; spare speech.
Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak, 
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air. 
Yours in the ranks of death.  My most dear Gloucester!
O, the difference of man and man!
To thee a woman's services are due,
I have been worth the whistling.  O Goneril,
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition;
That nature which contemns it origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither,
Wisdom and goodness to the vild seem vild,
Filths savor but themselves. What have you done? 
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?
A father, and a gracious aged man, 
Whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would lick, 
Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vild offenses,
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.  Milk-livered man,
That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs,
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honor from thy suffering, that not know'st
Fools do those villains pity who are punished
Ere they have done their mischief, where's thy drum?
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
Whilst thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries,
"Alack, why does he so?"  See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity shows not in the fiend 
So horrid as in woman.  O vain fool! 
Thou changed and self-covered thing, for shame
Bemonster not thy feature. Were't my fitness
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend,
O my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead,
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.  Gloucester's eyes?
A servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse,
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master, who, thereat enraged,
Flew on him, and amongst them felled him dead,
But not without that harmful stroke which since
Hath plucked him after.  This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes 
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester, 
Lost he his other eye?  Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
'Tis from your sister.  One way I like this well,
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way,
The news is not so tart. -- I'll read, and answer. 
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.  He is not here.
No, my good lord, I met him back again.
Ay, my good lord; 'twas he informed against him,
And quit the house on purpose that their punishment
Might have the freer course.  Gloucester, I live 
To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend, 
Ay, sir, she took them, read them in my presence,
And now and then an ample tear trilled down
Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen
Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
Sought to be king o'er her.  O then it moved her.
Not to a rage, patience and sorrow strove 
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once; her smiles and tears 
Were like a better way: those happy smilets 
That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know
What guests were in her eyes, which, parted thence,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of "father"
Pantingly forth, as if it pressed her heart; 
Cried, "Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies, sisters!
Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th, storm? i' th' night? 
Let pity not be believed!" There she shook 
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And, clamor-moist'ned, then away she started
To deal with grief alone.  It is the stars,
The stars above us, govern our conditions,
Else one self mate and make could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
Was this before the King returned?  No, since.
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town,
Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.  Why, good sir?
That stripped her from his benediction, turned her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights 
To his dog-hearted daughters -- these things sting
His mind so venomously, that burning shame 
Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear,
And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go
Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud,
Crowned with rank femiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flow'rs,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
Search every acre in the high-grown field, 
And bring him to our eye.  What can man's wisdom 
In the restoring his bereaved sense? 
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks; that to provoke in him
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.  All blest secrets,
All you unpublished virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate
In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him,
Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.  News, madam!
The British pow'rs are marching hitherward.
'Tis known before; our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about;
My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied. 
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged father's right. 
But are my brother's pow'rs set forth?  Ay, madam.
Himself in person there?  Madam, with much ado;
Your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
What might import my sister's letter to him?
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
To let him live; where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life; moreover to descry
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
Our troops set forth tomorrow, stay with us; 
The ways are dangerous.  I may not, madam;
My lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike
Some things -- I know not what. I'll love thee much --
Let me unseal the letter.  Madam, I had rather --
I know your lady does not love her husband,
I am sure of that; and at her late being here
She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
I speak in understanding: y' are; I know't.
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you give him this;
And when your mistress hears thus much from you, 
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, 
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
What party I do follow.  Fare thee well. 
When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.
Methinks the ground is even.  Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?  No, truly.
Why then your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes' anguish.  So may it be indeed.
Methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak'st
In better phrase and matter than thou didst. 
Y' are much deceived. In nothing am I changed 
But in my garments.  Methinks y' are better spoken.
Come on, sir, here's the place; stand still.  How fearful
And dizzy 'tis, to cast one's eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers sampire, dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
Diminished to her cock; her cock, a buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge,
That on th' unnumb'red idle pebble chafes,
Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more,
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.  Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand. You are now within a foot
Of th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moon 
Would I not leap upright.  Let go my hand. 
Here, friend, 's another purse; in it a jewel 
Well worth a poor man's taking. Fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off:
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now fare ye well, good sir.  With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.  O you mighty gods! 
This world I do renounce, and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off.
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O bless him!
Now, fellow, fare thee well.  Gone, sir; farewell!
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life, when life itself
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
By this had thought been past. Alive or dead? -- 
Ho, you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak! --
Thus might he pass indeed; yet he revives. -- 
What are you, sir?  Away, and let me die.
Hadst thou been aught but goss'mer, feathers, air
(So many fathom down precipitating),
Thou'dst shivered like an egg: but thou dost breathe,
Hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art sound.
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height, the shrill-gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,
To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,
When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage,
And frustrate his proud will.  Give me your arm.
Up -- so. How is't? Feel you your legs? You stand. 
Too well, too well.  This is above all strangeness. 
Upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that 
Which parted from you?  A poor unfortunate beggar.
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns welked and waved like the enridged sea.
It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honors
Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
I do remember now. Henceforth I'll bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
"Enough, enough," and die. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man; often 'twould say,
"The fiend, the fiend!" -- he led me to that place.
Bear free and patient thoughts.  But who comes here?
The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
The trick of that voice I do well remember;
Is't not the King?  Ay, every inch a king!
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes. 
I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause? 
Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No,
The wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly
Was kinder to his father than my daughters
To't, luxury, pell-mell, for I lack soldiers.
Whose face between her forks presages snow; 
That minces virtue, and does shake the head
The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't
But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
Beneath is all the fiends': there's hell, there's darkness,
There is the sulphurous pit, burning, scalding,
Let me wipe it first, it smells of mortality.
O ruined piece of nature! This great world
Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thy own back, 
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
Thorough tattered clothes small vices do appear;
Robes and furred gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say none, I'll able 'em.
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal th' accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes,
And like a scurvy politician, seem
To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now.
Pull off my boots; harder, harder -- so.
O, matter and impertinency mixed,
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither.
Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools. -- This' a good block. 
It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe 
A troop of horse with felt. I'll put't in proof,
And when I have stol'n upon these son-in-laws,
O, here he is: lay hand upon him. -- Sir,
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well,
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons,
Why, this would make a man a man of salt
To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
Ay, and laying autumn's dust.   Good sir -- 
I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom.
I will be jovial. Come, come, I am a king,
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.  Hail, gentle sir.
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
Most sure and vulgar; every one hears that,
Which can distinguish sound.  But by your favor,
Near and on speedy foot; the main descry
Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.   I thank you, sir. 
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me,
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again 
To die before you please!   Well pray you, father.
A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
I'll lead you to some biding.   Hearty thanks;
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot!  A proclaimed prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember; the sword is out
That must destroy thee.  Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough to't.  Wherefore, bold peasant,
Durst thou support a published traitor? Hence, 
Lest that th' infection of his fortune take
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse:
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
And give the letters which thou find'st about me
To Edmund Earl of Gloucester; seek him out
I know thee well; a serviceable villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.   What, is he dead?
Let's see these pockets; the letters that he speaks of 
May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not:
To know our enemies' minds, we rip their hearts,
O indistinguished space of woman's will!
A plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,
Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time 
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practiced Duke. For him 'tis well 
That of thy death and business I can tell. 
The King is mad; how stiff is my vild sense
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves.   Give me your hand;
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend. 
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more nor clipt, but so.  Be better suited,
These weeds are memories of those worser hours; 
I prithee put them off.  Pardon, dear madam, 
Yet to be known shortens my made intent. 
My boon I make it, that you know me not
Cure this great breach in his abused nature,
Th' untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up
Of this child-changed father!  So please your Majesty
That we may wake the King? he hath slept long.
Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed
I' th' sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?
Ay, madam; in the heaviness of sleep
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him,
I doubt not of his temperance.  Very well.
Please you draw near. -- Louder the music there! 
O my dear father, restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made.  Kind and dear princess!
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the warring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross lightning? to watch -- poor perdu! --
With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire, and wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,
'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes, speak to him.
How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty? 
You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave: 
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.   Sir, do you know me?
You are a spirit, I know; when did you die?
He's scarce awake, let him alone a while.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
I will not swear these are my hands. Let's see,
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
Of my condition!  O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hand in benediction o'er me.
No, sir, you must not kneel.  Pray do not mock me.
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less; 
I fear I am not in my perfect mind. 
Methinks I should know you, and know this man, 
Yet I am doubtful: for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,
For (as I am a man) I think this lady
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray weep not.
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know, you do not love me, for your sisters
Have (as I do remember) done me wrong:
You have some cause, they have not.  No cause, no cause.
Am I in France?  In your own kingdom, sir.
Be comforted, good madam, the great rage,
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought. 
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by aught 
To change the course. He's full of alteration 
And self-reproving -- bring his constant pleasure.
Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
'Tis to be doubted, madam.  Now, sweet lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?  In honored love.
But have you never found my brother's way
To the forfended place? That thought abuses you.
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
And bosomed with her -- as far as we call hers.
I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,
Be not familiar with her.  Fear me not.
I had rather lose the battle than that sister 
Our very loving sister, well bemet.
Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant. For this business,
It touches us as France invades our land,
Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Sir, you speak nobly.  Why is this reasoned?
Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.  Let's then determine
With th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
No.   'Tis most convenient, pray go with us. 
O ho, I know the riddle. -- I will go.
If e'er your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.  I'll overtake you. -- Speak.
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you!
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
Why, fare thee well, I will o'erlook thy paper.
The enemy's in view, draw up your powers. 
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces,
By diligent discovery, but your haste 
Is now urged on you.  We will greet the time.  
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive: to take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
His countenance for the battle, which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon; for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.  
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree 
For your good host; pray that the right may thrive. 
If ever I return to you again,
I'll bring you comfort.  Grace go with you, sir! 
Away, old man, give me thy hand, away!
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
No further, sir, a man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence even as their coming hither,
Ripeness is all. Come on.  And that's true too. 
Some officers take them away. Good guard,
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.  We are not the first 
Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.
For thee, oppressed king, I am cast down, 
Myself could else out-frown false Fortune's frown. 
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no! Come let's away to prison:
We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage;
When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we'll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too --
Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out --
And take upon 's the mystery of things
As if we were God's spies; and we'll wear out,
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones,
That ebb and flow by th' moon.  Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell, 
Ere they shall make us weep! We'll see 'em starved first. 
Take thou this note  go follow them to prison.
One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes. Know thou this, that men
Are as the time is: to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
Will not bear question; either say thou'lt do't,
Or thrive by other means.  I'll do't, my lord.
About it, and write happy when th' hast done.
Mark, I say instantly, and carry it so
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats,
Sir, you have showed today your valiant strain, 
And fortune led you well. You have the captives
Who were the opposites of this day's strife; 
I do require them of you, so to use them 
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.  Sir, I thought it fit
To send the old and miserable King
To some retention and appointed guard,
Whose age had charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
And turn our impressed lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,
My reason all the same, and they are ready
tomorrow, or at further space, t' appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend,
And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.   Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.  That's as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers, 
Bore the commission of my place and person,
The which immediacy may well stand up, 
And call itself your brother.  Not so hot.
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
More than in your addition.  In my rights,
By me invested, he compeers the best.
That were the most, if he should husband you.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.  Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so looked but a-squint.
Lady, I am not well, else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
Dispose of them, of me; the walls is thine.
Witness the world, that I create thee here
My lord and master.  Mean you to enjoy him?
The let-alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine, lord.  Half-blooded fellow, yes. 
Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine. 
Stay yet, hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee 
On capital treason, and in thy attaint,
This gilded serpent  For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife;
'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
And I, her husband, contradict your banes.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My lady is bespoke.  An enterlude!
Thou art armed, Gloucester, let the trumpet sound.
If none appear to prove upon thy person
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge  I'll make it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaimed thee.  Sick, O, sick!
There's my exchange  What in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies. 
Call by the trumpet; he that dares approach: 
On him, on you -- who not? -- I will maintain
A herald, ho!   A herald, ho, a herald!
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.   My sickness grows upon me.
She is not well, convey her to my tent.
Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
Upon this call o' th' trumpet.  What are you?
Your name, your quality? and why you answer
This present summons?  Know, my name is lost,
By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit,
Yet am I noble as the adversary
I come to cope.   Which is that adversary?
What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
Himself; what say'st thou to him?  Draw thy sword,
That if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice; here is mine:
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence, 
Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune, 
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father,
Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince,
And from th' extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou "No,"
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.  In wisdom I should ask thy name,
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by, and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
Save him, save him!  This is practice, Gloucester. 
By th' law of war thou wast not bound to answer 
An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,
But cozened and beguiled.  Shut your mouth, dame,
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady, I perceive you know it.
Say if I do, the laws are mine, not thine;
Who can arraign me for't?  Most monstrous! O!
Know'st thou this paper?  Ask me not what I know. 
Go after her; she's desperate, govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done,
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
'Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
I do forgive thee.  Let's exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund; 
If more, the more th' hast wronged me.}
My name is Edgar, and thy father's son. 
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices 
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes. Th' hast spoken right, 'tis true.
The wheel is come full circle, I am here.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father.   Worthy prince, I know't.
How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,
And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape,
That followed me so near (O, our lives' sweetness!
That we the pain of death would hourly die
Rather than die at once!), taught me to shift
Into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance
That very dogs disdained; and in this habit 
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost; became his guide, 
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair; 
Never (O fault!) revealed myself unto him,
Until some half hour past, when I was armed.
Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flawed heart
(Alack, too weak the conflict to support!)
'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.  This speech of yours hath moved me,
And shall perchance do good: but speak you on,
You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.  This would have seemed a period
To such as love not sorrow, but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more,
Was big in clamor, came there in a man,
Who, having seen me in my worst estate, 
Shunned my abhorred society, but then finding
Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms 
He fastened on my neck and bellowed out 
As he'd burst heaven, threw him on my father,
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear received, which in recounting,
His grief grew puissant and the strings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranced.  But who was this?
Kent, sir, the banished Kent, who in disguise
Followed his enemy king, and did him service
Help, help! O, help!  What kind of help?  Speak, man.
What means this bloody knife?  Tis hot, it smokes,
It came even from the heart of -- O, she's dead!
Your lady, sir, your lady; and her sister
By her is poisoned; she confesses it. 
I was contracted to them both; all three
Now marry in an instant. Here comes Kent. 
Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead.
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity. -- O, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.  I am come
To bid my king and master aye good night.
Is he not here?   Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia? 
Alack, why thus?  Yet Edmund was beloved!
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
I pant for life. Some good I mean to do, 
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send
(Be brief in it) to th' castle, for my writ 
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia. 
To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
Give it the captain.  Haste thee, for thy life. 
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
Howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones!
Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever! 
I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass, 
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone, 
Why then she lives.  Is this the promised end?
Or image of that horror?   Fall, and cease!
This feather stirs, she lives! If it be so, 
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.  O my good master! 
Prithee away.  'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
I might have saved her, now she's gone for ever!
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha!
What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.
'Tis true, my lords, he did.  Did I not, fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
I would have made them skip. I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o' th' best; I'll tell you straight.
If Fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?  The same:
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
He's a good fellow, I can tell you that; 
He'll strike, and quickly too.  He's dead and rotten.
No, my good lord, I am the very man -- 
That from your first of difference and decay,
Have followed your sad steps -- You are welcome hither.
Nor no man else. All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have foredone themselves,
And desperately are dead.  Ay, so I think.
He knows not what he says, and vain is it
That we present us to him. Very bootless.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
During the life of this old majesty,
To him our absolute power.  You, to your rights,
With boot, and such addition as your honors 
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste 
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
And my poor fool is hanged! No, no, no life!
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never.
Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her! Look her lips,
Look there, look there!  He faints. My lord, my lord!
Break, heart, I prithee break!  Look up, my lord.
Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass, he hates him
That would upon the rack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.  He is gone indeed.
The wonder is he hath endured so long,
Bear them from hence. Our present business 
Is general woe.  Friends of my soul, you twain 
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain. 
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go:
My master calls me, I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say:
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
