<MFMvs> Of government the properties to unfold
Would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you. Then no more remains 
And let them work. The nature of our people, 
Our city's institutions, and the terms 
For common justice, y' are as pregnant in
As art and practice hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
I say, bid come before us Angelo.
What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply,
Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honor,
It is Lord Angelo. Look where he comes.
Always obedient to your Grace's will, 
I come to know your pleasure. Angelo: 
There is a kind of character in thy life, 
That to th' observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
But to fine issues; nor Nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence,
But like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise.
In our remove be thou at full ourself.
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission. Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my mettle 
Before so noble and so great a figure 
Be stamped upon it. No more evasion.
We have with a leavened and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honors.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestioned
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What doth be fall you here. So fare you well.
To th' hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions. Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.
Nor need you (on mine honor) have to do
With any scruple. Your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand,
I'll privily away. I love the people, 
But do not like to stage me to their eyes;
Though it do well, I do not relish well 
Their loud applause and aves vehement; 
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more fare you well.
The heavens give safety to your purposes!
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place.
A pow'r I have, but of what strength and nature
'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point. I'll wait upon your honor. 
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
Thus can the demigod, Authority,
Make us pay down for our offense by weight
The words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
Why, how now, Claudio? whence comes this restraint?
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use 
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, 
A thirsty evil, and when we drink we die. 
If I could speak so wisely under an arrest,
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.
A hundred! if they'll do you any good.
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract 
I got possession of Julietta's bed.
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack 
Of outward order. This we came not to,
Only for propagation of a dow'r 
Remaining in the coffer of her friends, 
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.
With child, perhaps? Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the Duke --
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his eminence that fills it up,
I stagger in -- but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscoured armor, hung by th' wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act 
Freshly on me -- 'tis surely for a name.
I have done so, but he's not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
I have great hope in that; for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
Within two hours. Come, officer, away! 
No; holy father, throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbor, hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth. May your Grace speak of it?
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed,
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, witless bravery keeps.
I have delivered to Lord Angelo
(A man of stricture and firm abstinence)
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travelled to Poland
(For so I have strewed it in the common ear,
And so it is received). Now, pious sir, 
You will demand of me why I do this.
We have strict statutes and most biting laws 
(The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds),
Which for this fourteen years we have let slip,
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children's sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
[Becomes] more mocked than feared; so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum. It rested in your Grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Than in Lord Angelo. I do fear -- too dreadful;
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done, 
When evil deeds have their permissive pass,
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father, 
I have on Angelo imposed the office, 
Who may, in th' ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people; therefore I prithee
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true friar. Moe reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows; or that his appetite
Is more to bread than Stone: hence shall we see
If power change purpose: what our seemers be.
And have you nuns no farther privileges?
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more, 
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
Ho! Peace be in this place! Who's that which calls?
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress;
Then if you speak, you must not show your face,
Or if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again; I pray you answer him. 
Peace and prosperity! Who is 't that calls?
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place, and the fair sister 
To her unhappy brother Claudio?
Why "her unhappy brother"? let me ask, 
The rather for I now must make you know 
I am that Isabella, and his sister.
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
Sir, make me not your story. 'Tis true.
I would not -- though 'tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
Tongue far from heart -- play with all virgins so.
I hold you as a thing enskied, and sainted,
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talked with in sincerity,
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus: 
Your brother and his lover have embraced.
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time 
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings 
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet? 
Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection. She it is.
O, let him marry her. This is the point.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen (myself being one)
In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His [givings]-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels 
The wanton stings and motions of the sense;
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge 
With profits of the mind: study and fast. 
He (to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law,
As mice by lions) hath picked out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
Falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigor of the statute,
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo. And that's my pith 
Of business 'twixt you and your poor brother.
Doth he so seek his life? H'as censured him 
Already, and as I hear, the Provost hath
A warrant for 's execution.
Alas, what poor ability's in me
To do him good! Assay the pow'r you have.
My power? Alas, I doubt -- Our doubts are traitors,
And makes us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
I'll see what I can do. But speedily.
No longer staying but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.
Commend me to my brother. Soon at night
I'll send him certain word of my success. 
I take my leave of you. Good sir, adieu. 
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch and not their terror. Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little,
Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman,
Whom I would save, had a most noble father!
(Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue)
That in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing
Or that the resolute acting of [your] blood
Could have attained th' effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life 
Erred in this point which now you censure him,
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, 
Another thing to fall. I not deny
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
That justice seizes. What knows the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't,
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offense
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.
Be it as your wisdom will. Where is the Provost? 
Here, if it like your honor. See that Claudio 
Be executed by nine tomorrow morning. 
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
Well; heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
Some run from brakes of ice and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.
Why, very well then; I hope here be truths.
When nights are longest there. I'll take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause,
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship. 
It grieves me for the death of Claudio,
Lord Angelo is severe. It is but needful.
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
But yet, poor Claudio; there is no remedy.
He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
I'll tell him of you. Pray you do. I'll know
His pleasure, may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream! 
All sects, all ages smack of this vice, and he
To die for't! Now, what's the matter, Provost?
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
Under your good correction, I have seen
When, after execution, judgment hath
Do you your office, or give up your place,
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She's very near her hour. Dispose of her
To some more fitter place; and that with speed.
Here is the sister of the man condemned 
Desires access to you. Hath he a sister?
Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already. Well; let her be admitted. 
See you the fornicatress be removed.
Let her have needful but not lavish means;
There shall be order for't. 'Save your honor!
I am a woeful suitor to your honor,
Please but your honor hear me. Well; what's your suit?
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice; 
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am 
At war 'twixt will and will not. Well; the matter?
I have a brother is condemned to die;
I do beseech you let it be his fault,
And not my brother. Heaven give thee moving graces!
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault's condemned ere it be done.
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
I had a brother then. Heaven keep your honor!
Give't not o'er so. To him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
You are too cold. If you should need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it;
Must he needs die? Maiden, no remedy. 
Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy. 
I will not do't. But can you if you would?
Look what I will not, that I cannot do.
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touched with that remorse
As mine is to him? He's sentenced;'tis too late.
Too late? Why, no; I that do speak a word
May call it again. Well, believe this,
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
If he had been as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he, like you,
Would not have been so stern. Pray you be gone.
I would to heaven I had your potency, 
And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge, 
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words. Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once,
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made. Be you content, fair maid,
It is the law, not I, condemn your brother.
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.
tomorrow? O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven 
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you: 
Who is it that hath died for this offense?
There's many have committed it. Ay, well said.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept. 
Those many had not dared to do that evil 
If the first that did th' edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now 'tis awake, 
Takes note of what is done, and like a prophet 
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils,
Either now, or by remissness new conceived,
And so in progress to be hatched and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But here they live, to end. Yet show some pity.
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismissed offense would after gall,
And do him right that answering one foul wrong
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies tomorrow; be content.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffers. O it is excellent
To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant. That's well said.
As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet, 
For every pelting, petty officer
Nothing but thunder! Merciful heaven, 
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
Than the soft myrtle; but man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured
[His glassy essence], like an angry ape
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As makes the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
O, to him, to him, wench! he will relent. 
He's coming; I perceive't. Pray heaven she win him!
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.
That in the captain's but a choleric word,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy, 
Why do you put these sayings upon me? 
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself,
That skins the vice o' th' top. Go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brother's fault. If it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother's life. She speaks, and 'tis
I will bethink me. Come again tomorrow.
Hark how I'll bribe you. Good my lord, turn back. 
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
Not with fond sicles of the tested gold, 
Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
As fancy values them; but with true prayers, 
That shall be up at heaven, and enter there 
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal. Well; come to me tomorrow.
Where prayers cross. At what hour tomorrow
'Save your honor! From thee: even from thy virtue.
What's this? what's this? Is this her fault, or mine?
The tempter, or the tempted, who sins most, ha?
Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flow'r, 
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense 
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou? or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again?
And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
cunning enemy, that to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet,
With all her double vigor, art and nature,
Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Ever till now,
When men were fond, I smiled and wond'red how.
Hail to you, Provost! so I think you are.
I am the Provost. What's your will, good friar?
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them, and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report. She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced; a young man
More fit to do another such offense 
When must he die? As I do think, tomorrow. 
I have provided for you. Stay a while,
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on. I'll gladly learn.
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.
So then it seems your most offenseful act
Was mutually committed? Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
'Tis meet so, daughter, but lest you do repent 
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven, 
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
I do repent me as it is an evil, 
Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Must die tomorrow? O injurious love,
That respites me a life whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror! 'Tis pity of him. 
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel; heaven in my mouth, 
As if I did but only chew his name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil 
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied, 
Is like a good thing, being often read,
Grown [sere] and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein (let no man hear me) I take pride,
Could I, with boot, change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
Let's write "good angel" on the devil's horn,
'Tis not the devil's crest. How now? who's there?
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all my other parts 
So play the foolish throngs with one that swounds, 
Come all to help him, and so stop the air 
By which he should revive; and even so
The general subject to a well-wished king
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offense. How now, fair maid?
That you might know it, would much better please me
Yet may he live a while; and it may be
As long as you or I. Yet he must die.
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted 
Ha? fie, these filthy vices! It were as good 
To pardon him that hath from nature stol'n 
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
In stamps that are forbid. 'Tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother's life, [or,] to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stained? Sir, believe this,
I had rather give my body than my soul.
I talk not of your soul; our compelled sins 
Stand more for number than for accompt. How say you? 
Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak 
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I (now the voice of the recorded law)
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life;
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother's life? Please you to do't,
I'll take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it! You granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn-prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer. Nay, but hear me,
Your sense pursues not mine. Either you are ignorant,
Or seem so [craftily]; and that's not good.
Let [me] be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better. 
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself; as these black masks 
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder 
Than beauty could, displayed. But mark me:
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
And his offense is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.
Admit no other way to save his life
(As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the loss of question), that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-[binding] law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer --
As much for my poor brother as myself:
That is, were I under the terms of death, 
Th' impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death, as to a bed 
That longing have been sick for, ere I'ld yield 
Better it were a brother died at once,
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
You seemed of late to make the law a tyrant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
O, pardon me, my lord, it oft falls out,
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.
We are all frail. Else let my brother die,
If not a fedary, but only he, 
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves, 
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women? Help heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail,
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints. I think it well;
And from this testimony of your own sex
(Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames), let me be bold.
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is a woman; if you be more, you're none;
If you be one (as you are well expressed
By all external warrants), show it now,
By putting on the destined livery.
I have no tongue but one; gentle my lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.
And you tell me that he shall die for't. 
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love. 
I know your virtue hath a license in't,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others. Believe me, on mine honor,
Ha? little honor to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for't!
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
My unsoiled name, th' austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i' th' state,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein.
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite,
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes 
That banish what they sue for. Redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will, 
Or else he must not only die the death, 
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To ling'ring sufferance. Answer me tomorrow,
Or by the affection that now guides me most,
I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can: my false o'erweighs your true.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof,
Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite,
To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother.
Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honor
That had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die; 
More than our brother is our chastity.
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request, 
And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest. 
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
The miserable have no other medicine
I have hope to live, and am prepared to die.
Be absolute for death: either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost this habitation where thou keep'st
Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art death's fool,
For him thou labor'st by thy flight to Shun, 
And yet run'st toward him still. Thou art not noble,
For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st 
Are nursed by baseness. Thou'rt by no means valiant, 
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provok'st, yet grossly fear'st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself,
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,
For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain,
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor,
For like an ass, whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none,
For thine own bowels, which do call thee [sire],
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, Sapego, and the rheum
But as it were an after-dinner's sleep,
Dreaming on both, for all thy blessed youth 
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich, 
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, 
To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear
That makes these odds all even. I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life. Let it come on.
What ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
Who's there? Come in, the wish deserves a welcome. 
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
As all comforts are: most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger;
Therefore your best appointment make with speed,
tomorrow you set on. Is there no remedy?
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain. But is there any?
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death. Perpetual durance?
Ay, just, perpetual durance, a restraint,
[Though] all the world's vastidity you had,
To a determined scope. But in what nature?
In such a one as, you consenting to't, 
Would bark your honor from that trunk you bear, 
And leave you naked. Let me know the point.
O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honor. Dar'st thou die? 
The sense of death is most in apprehension,
And the poor beetle that we tread upon 
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great 
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flow'ry tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
There spake my brother; there my father's grave 
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth [enew]
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell. The prenzie Angelo?
O,'tis the cunning livery of hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio, 
If I would yield him my virginity,
Thou mightst be freed! O heavens, it cannot be. 
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offense,
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest tomorrow. Thou shalt not do't.
I'd throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin. Thanks, dear Isabel.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.
That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose,
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!
What says my brother? Death is a fearful thing.
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where; 
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprisoned in the viewless winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendant world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling -- 'tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, [penury], and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far,
That it becomes a virtue. O you beast! 
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice? 
Is't not a kind of incest, to take life 
From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother played my father fair!
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance!
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
Nay, hear me, Isabel. O fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd,
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such,a filthy vice; say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, [array] myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but 
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, 
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer.
Correction and instruction must both work
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
No might nor greatness in mortality 
Can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong 
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue? 
But who comes here? Go, away with her to prison.
Not of this country, though my chance is now 
To use it for my time. I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the [See],
In special business from his Holiness.
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away.
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often stilled my brawling discontent. 
I cry you mercy, Sir, and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical. 
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe. 
'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
What is the news from this good deputy?
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate, 
That makes his opening with this bigger key.
This other doth command a little door, 
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads; 
There have I made my promise upon the heavy
Middle of the night to call upon him.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't.
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o'er. Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
No; none but only a repair i' th' dark,
And that I have possessed him my most stay
Can be but brief; for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
I come about my brother. 'Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this. What ho, within! come forth!
I pray you be acquainted with this maid, 
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
Take then this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure, but make haste,
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee. Volumes of report
Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream,
And rack thee in their fancies. Welcome, how agreed?
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father, 
If you advise it. It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too. Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but soft and low,
"Remember now my brother." Fear me not.
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go,
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio. 
Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murtherer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death.
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight tomorrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
As fast locked up in sleep as guiltless labor
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
He will not wake. Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself. But hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort! By and by. --
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio. Welcome, father. 
The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night 
Not Isabel? No. They will then ere't be long.
There's some in hope. It is a bitter deputy.
Not so, not so; his life is paralleled
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice.
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
To qualify in others. Were he mealed with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous,
But this being so, he's just. Now are they come. 
This is a gentle Provost: seldom when
The steeled jailer is the friend of men.
How now? what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste
That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes. 
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in; he is called up.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die tomorrow? None, sir, none.
As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning. Happily
You something know, yet I believe there comes
No countermand; no such example have we.
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
This is his pardon, purchased by such sin
For which the pardoner himself is in.
Hence hath offense his quick celerity,
When it is borne in high authority.
When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended,
That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
Unfit to live, or die; O gravel heart!
After him, fellows, bring him to the block.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable. Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
Just of his color. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined,
And satisfy the deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
O,'tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently, the hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo. See this he done, 
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die. 
This shall be done, good father, presently. 
But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive? Let this be done:
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To yond generation, you shall find
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo. 
Now will I write letters to Angelo
(The provost, he shall bear them), whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home;
And that by great injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly. Him I'll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount,
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and weal-balanced form, 
Here is the head, I'll carry it myself.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return,
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours. I'll make all speed. 
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither.
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected. Ho, by your leave!
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon? 
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world,
His head is off, and sent to Angelo. 
Nay, but it is not so. It is no other.
Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.
O, I will to him, and pluck out his eyes!
You shall not be admitted to his sight.
Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!
This nor hurts him, nor profits you a jot.
Forbear it therefore, give your cause to heaven.
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home tomorrow -- nay, dry your eyes --
One of our covent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance: already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch, 
Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honor. I am directed by you. 
This letter then to Friar Peter give;
'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house tonight. Her cause and yours
I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflow'red maid!
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,
For my authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth with dangerous sense
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
By so receiving a dishonored life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived!
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right -- we would, and we would not.
These letters at fit time deliver me.
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being a foot, keep your instruction,
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavio's house,
And tell him where I stay. Give the like notice
To Valentius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate.
I thank thee, Varrius, thou hast made good haste. 
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends 
Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius!
To speak so indirectly I am loath.
I would say the truth, but to accuse him so,
That is your part. Yet I am advised to do it,
He says, to veil full purpose. Be ruled by him.
Besides, he tells me that if peradventure 
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange, for 'tis a physic 
I would Friar Peter -- O, peace, the friar is come.
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke,
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is ent'ring; therefore hence away!
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you. 
Happy return be to your royal Grace! 
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
O, your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves with characters of brass
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
And razure of oblivion. Give [me] your hand,
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favors that keep within. Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand;
Now is your time: speak loud, and kneel before him. 
Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard 
Upon a wronged -- I would fain have said a maid!
O worthy Prince, dishonor not your eye
By throwing it on any other object,
Till you have heard me in my true complaint,
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice;
Reveal yourself to him. O worthy Duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil.
Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm.
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
Cut off by course of justice -- By course of justice!
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
Most strange! but yet most truly will I speak: 
That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murtherer, is't not strange? 
That Angelo is an adulterous thief, 
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange;
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To th' end of reck'ning. Away with her! Poor soul,
She speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
O Prince, I conjure thee, as thou believ'st
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That which but seems unlike; 'tis not impossible
But one the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute
As Angelo. Even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal Prince,
If he be less, he's nothing, but he's more, 
Had I more name for badness. By mine honesty, 
If she be mad, as I believe no other, 
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependancy of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madness. O gracious Duke,
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality, but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear, where it seems hid,
Have sure more lack of reason. What would you say?
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemned upon the act of fornication
To lose his head, condemned by Angelo.
I (in probation of a sisterhood)
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo, 
For her poor brother's pardon. That's he indeed. 
You were not bid to speak. No, my good lord,
Nor wished to hold my peace. I wish you now then.
Pray you take note of it; and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
The warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale --
It may be right, but you are i' the wrong
To speak before your time. Proceed. I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy --
That's somewhat madly spoken. Pardon it,
In brief, to set the needless process by --
How I persuaded, how I prayed, and kneeled, 
How he refelled me, and how I replied
(For this was of much length) -- the vild conclusion 
I now begin with grief and shame to utter. 
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honor,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother's head. This is most likely!
O that it were as like as it is true!
By heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what thou speak'st,
Or else thou art suborned against his honor
In hateful practice. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
He would have weighed thy brother by himself,
And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on;
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou cam'st here to complain. And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above, 
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time 
Unfold the evil which is here wrapped up
In countenance! Heaven shield your Grace from woe,
As I, thus wronged, hence unbelieved go!
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
My lord, I know him, 'tis a meddling friar.
For certain words he spake against your Grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.
Words against me? This' a good friar, belike!
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, 
I saw them at the prison. A saucy friar,
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
I know him for a man divine and holy,
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he's reported by this gentleman;
And on my trust, a man that never yet
Did (as he vouches) misreport your Grace.
My lord, most villainously, believe it.
Well; he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither,
To speak as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath 
And all probation will make up full clear,
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman, 
To justify this worthy nobleman, 
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it. Good friar, let's hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo,
In this I'll be impartial. Be you judge
Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar?
First, let her show [her] face, and after speak.
Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face
Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause
To prattle for himself. Well, my lord. 
My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
And I confess besides I am no maid. 
I have known my husband, yet my husband 
She that accuses him of fornication,
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him, my lord, with such a time
When I'll depose I had him in mine arms
Charges she moe than me? Not that I know.
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face. 
My husband bids me, now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo, 
Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
This is the hand which, with a vowed contract,
Was fast belocked in thine; this is the body
That took away the match from Isabel,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person. Know you this woman?
Carnally, she says. Sirrah, no more!
My lord, I must confess I know this woman,
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition, but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity. Since which time of five years
Upon my faith and honor. Noble Prince, 
As there comes light from heaven, and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth, and truth in virtue, 
I am affianced this man's wife as strongly
As words could make up vows; and, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone, in's garden-house,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument! I did but smile till now.
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice,
My patience here is touched. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
To find this practice out. Ay, with my heart,
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit 
That's sealed in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains 
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived. 
There is another friar that set them on,
Would he were here, my lord, for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint.
Your Provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him. Go, do it instantly. 
And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best,
But stir not you till you have well determined
Respect to your great place! and let the devil
Be sometime honored for his burning throne!
Where is the Duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
The Duke's in us; and we will hear you speak: 
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The Duke's unjust
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
Is't not enough thou hast suborned these women 
To accuse this worthy man, but in foul mouth,
And in the witness of his proper ear, 
To call him villain, and then to glance from him 
To th' Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence; to th' rack with him! We'll touze you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What? "unjust"? Be not so hot. The Duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own. His subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble,
Till it o'errun the stew; laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark. Slander to th' state!
Away with him to prison. What can you vouch
Against him, Signior Lucio? Is this the man
That you did tell us of? 'Tis he, my lord.
Come hither, goodman bald-pate, do you know me? 
We'll borrow place of him. -- Sir, by your leave.
Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
Rely upon it till my tale be heard, 
And hold no longer out. O my dread lord, 
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness, 
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your Grace, like pow'r divine,
Hath looked upon my passes. Then, good Prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession.
Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
Say: wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar, which consummate,
Return him here again. Go with him, Provost.
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonor
Your friar is now your prince. As I was then 
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still 
Attorneyed at your service. O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employed and pained
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother's death I know sits at your heart;
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Laboring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose. But peace be with him!
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother. I do, my lord. 
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged 
Your well-defended honor, you must pardon 
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
Thereon dependant, for your brother's life --
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
"An Angelo for Claudio death for death!"
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and still for Measure
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;
Which though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stooped to death, and with like haste.
Away with him! O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband!
It is your husband mocked you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honor,
I thought your marriage fit; else imputation, 
For that he knew you, might reproach your life,
And choke your good to come. For his possessions, 
Although by [confiscation] they are ours, 
We do enstate and widow you with all,
To buy you a better husband. O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.
Never crave him, we are definitive.
Gentle my liege -- You do but lose your labor.
Away with him to death! Now, sir, to you.
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part! 
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I'll lend you all my life to do you service.
Against all sense you do importune her.
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror. Isabel!
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me.
Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all. 
They say best men are moulded out of faults,
And for the most, become much more the better 
For being a little bad; so may my husband. 
O Isabel! will you not lend a knee?
He dies for Claudio's death. Most bounteous sir:
Look, if it please you, on this man condemned
As if my brother lived. I partly think
A due sincerity governed his deeds,
Till he did look on me. Since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died;
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects,
Intents but merely thoughts. Merely, my lord.
Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour? It was commanded so. 
Had you a special warrant for the deed?
No, my good lord; it was by private message. 
For which I do discharge you of your office;
Give up your keys. Pardon me, noble lord,
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,
Yet did repent me, after more advice,
For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
That should by private order else have died,
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.
I am sorry, one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgment afterward.
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy: 
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.
Which is that Barnardine? This, my lord.
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squar'st thy life according. Thou'rt condemned,
But for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him,
This is another prisoner that I saved,
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head,
As like almost to Claudio as himself.
If he be like your brother, for his sake 
Is he pardoned, and for your lovely sake,
Give me your hand, and say you will be mine, 
He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe; 
Methinks I see a quick'ning in his eye. 
Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
I find an apt remission in myself;
And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.
Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow
(As I have heard him swear himself there's one
Whom he begot with child), let her appear,
And he shall marry her. The nuptial finished,
Let him be whipt and hanged.
Upon mine honor, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.
She, Claudio, that you wronged, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo!
I have confessed her, and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness,
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy,
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's,
Th' offense pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good,
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline, 
What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So bring us to our palace, where we'll show 
What's yet behind, that['s] meet you all should know.
