<MNDVS> Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour 
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in 
Another moon; but O, methinks, how slow  
This old moon [wanes]! She lingers my desires, 
Like to a step-dame, or a dowager,  
Long withering out a young man's revenue.  
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night; 
Four nights will quickly dream away the time; 
And then the moon, like to a silver bow 
[New] bent in heaven, shall behold the night 
Of our solemnities.  Go, Philostrate, 
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments, 
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth, 
Turn melancholy forth to funerals: 
The pale companion is not for our pomp. 
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword, 
And won thy love doing thee injuries; 
But I will wed thee in another key, 
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling. 
Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke! 
Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?  
Full of vexation come I, with complaint 
Against my child, my daughter Hermia. 
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord, 
This man hath my consent to marry her. 
Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke, 
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. 
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, 
And interchanged love-tokens with my child; 
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung 
With faining voice verses of faining love, 
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy 
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits, 
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats -- messengers 
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. 
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart, 
Turned her obedience (which is due to me) 
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke, 
Be it so she will not here before your Grace 
Consent to marry with Demetrius, 
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:  
As she is mine, I may dispose of her; 
Which shall be either to this gentleman,  
Or to her death, according to our law  
Immediately provided in that case. 
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid. 
To you your father should be as a god; 
One that composed your beauties; yea, and one 
To whom you are but as a form in wa
To leave the figure, or disfigure it. 
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman. 
So is Lysander.  In himself he is; 
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice, 
The other must be held the worthier. 
I would my father looked but with my eyes. 
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look. 
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me. 
I know not by what power I am made bold, 
Nor how it may concern my modesty, 
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts; 
But I beseech your Grace that I may know  
The worst that may befall me in this case, 
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.  
Either to die the death, or to abjure  
For ever the society of men. 
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires, 
Know of your youth, examine well your blood, 
Whether (if you yield not to your father's choice) 
You can endure the livery of a nun, 
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, 
To live a barren sister all your life, 
Chaunting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. 
Thrice blessed they that master so their blood 
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage; 
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled, 
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn 
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness. 
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, 
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up 
Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke 
My soul consents not to give sovereignty. 
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon -- 
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me  
For everlasting bond of fellowship -- 
Upon that day either prepare to die  
For disobedience to your father's will,  
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, 
Or on Diana's altar to protest 
For aye austerity and single life. 
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield 
Thy crazed title to my certain right. 
You have her father's love, Demetrius, 
Let me have Hermia's; do you marry him. 
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love; 
And what is mine, my love shall render him. 
And she is mine, and all my right of her 
I do estate unto Demetrius. 
I am, my lord, as well derived as he, 
As well possessed; my love is more than his; 
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked 
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius'; 
And (which is more than all these boasts can be) 
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. 
Why should not I then prosecute my right? 
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head, 
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,  
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes, 
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,  
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.  
I must confess that I have heard so much, 
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof; 
But, being over-full of self-affairs, 
My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come, 
And come, Egeus, you shall go with me; 
I have some private schooling for you both. 
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself 
To fit your fancies to your father's will; 
Or else the law of Athens yields you up 
(Which by no means we may extenuate) 
To death, or to a vow of single life. 
Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love? 
Demetrius and Egeus, go along; 
I must employ you in some business 
Against our nuptial, and confer with you 
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves. 
With duty and desire we follow you. 
How now, my love? why is your cheek so pale?  
How chance the roses there do fade so fast? 
Belike for want of rain; which I could well  
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.  
Ay me! for aught that I could ever read, 
Could ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run smooth; 
But either it was different in blood -- 
O cross! too high to be enthralled to [low]. 
Or else misgraffed in respect of years -- 
O spite! too old to be engaged to young. 
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends -- 
O hell, to choose love by another's eyes! 
Or if there were a sympathy in choice, 
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, 
Making it momentany as a sound, 
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, 
Brief as the lightning in the collied night, 
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth; 
And ere a man hath power to say "Behold!" 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up: 
If then true lovers have been ever crossed, 
It stands as an edict in destiny.  
Because it is a customary cross,  
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,  
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers. 
A good persuasion; therefore hear me, Hermia: 
I have a widow aunt, a dowager, 
Of great revenue, and she hath no child. 
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues; 
And she respects me as her only son. 
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee; 
And to that place the sharp Athenian law 
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then 
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night; 
And in the wood, a league without the town 
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena 
To do observance to a morn of May), 
There will I stay for thee.  My good Lysander, 
I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow, 
By his best arrow with the golden head, 
By the simplicity of Venus' doves, 
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, 
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen  
When the false Troyan under sail was seen, 
By all the vows that ever men have broke  
(In number more than ever women spoke),  
In that same place thou hast appointed me 
tomorrow truly will I meet with thee. 
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena. 
God speed fair Helena! whither away? 
Call you me fair?  That fair again unsay. 
Demetrius loves your fair, O happy fair! 
Your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue's sweet air 
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear 
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. 
Sickness is catching; O, were favor so, 
[Yours would] I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go; 
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye, 
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. 
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, 
The rest I'll give to be to you translated. 
O, teach me how you look, and with what art 
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.  
I frown upon him; yet he loves me still. 
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!  
I give him curses; yet he gives me love. 
O that my prayers could such affection move! 
The more I hate, the more he follows me. 
The more I love, the more he hateth me. 
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine. 
None but your beauty; would that fault were mine! 
Take comfort; he no more shall see my face;  
Lysander and myself will fly this place.  
Before the time I did Lysander see, 
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me; 
O then, what graces in my love do dwell, 
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell! 
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold: 
tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold 
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass, 
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass 
(A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), 
Through Athens gates have we devised to steal. 
And in the wood, where often you and I 
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, 
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel [sweet], 
There my Lysander and myself shall meet; 
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes, 
To seek new friends and [stranger companies]. 
Farewell, sweet playfellow, pray thou for us; 
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! 
Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight 
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.  
I will, my Hermia. Helena, adieu:  
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!  
How happy some o'er other some can be! 
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. 
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so; 
He will not know what all but he do know; 
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes, 
So I, admiring of his qualities. 
Things base and vile, holding no quantity, 
Love can transpose to form and dignity. 
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind; 
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. 
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste; 
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste; 
And therefore is Love said to be a child, 
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. 
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, 
So the boy Love is perjured every where; 
For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne, 
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine; 
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,  
So he dissolved, and show'rs of oaths did melt. 
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight;  
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night  
Pursue her; and for this intelligence 
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. 
But herein mean I to enrich my pain, 
To have his sight thither and back again.   
Answer as I call you.  Nick Bottom the weaver. 
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed. 
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus. 
What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant? 
How now, spirit, whither wander you? 
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. 
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone. 
Our Queen and all her elves come here anon. 
The King doth keep his revels here tonight; 
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight; 
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath, 
Because that she as her attendant hath 
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king; 
She never had so sweet a changeling. 
And jealous Oberon would have the child 
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild; 
But she, perforce, withholds the loved boy, 
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy. 
And now they never meet in grove or green, 
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen, 
But they do square, that all their elves for fear  
Creep into acorn-cups, and hide them there. 
Called Robin Goodfellow.  Are not you he 
That frights the maidens of the villagery, 
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern, 
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn, 
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm, 
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm? 
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck, 
You do their work, and they shall have good luck. 
I am that merry wanderer of the night. 
I jest to Oberon and make him smile 
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, 
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal; 
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl, 
In very likeness of a roasted crab, 
And when she drinks, against her lips I bob, 
And on her withered dewlop pour the ale. 
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,  
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me; 
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,  
And "tailor" cries, and falls into a cough;  
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loff, 
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear 
A merrier hour was never wasted there. 
But room, fairy! here comes Oberon. 
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone! 
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania. 
What, jealous Oberon?  (Fairies,) skip hence -- 
I have forsworn his bed and company. 
Tarry, rash wanton!  Am not I thy lord? 
Then I must be thy lady; but I know 
When thou hast stolen away from fairy land, 
And in the shape of Corin sat all day, 
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love,  
To amorous Phillida.  Why art thou here 
Come from the farthest steep of India?  
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,  
Your buskined mistress, and your warrior love, 
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come 
To give their bed joy and prosperity. 
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, 
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, 
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? 
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night 
From Perigenia, whom he ravished? 
And make him with fair [Aegles] break his faith, 
These are the forgeries of jealousy; 
And never, since the middle summer's spring, 
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, 
By paved fountain or by rushy brook, 
Or in the beached margent of the sea, 
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, 
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. 
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, 
As in revenge, have sucked up from the sea 
Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,  
Hath every pelting river made so proud 
That they have overborne their continents.  
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,  
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn 
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard. 
The fold stands empty in the drowned field, 
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock; 
The nine men's morris is filled up with mud, 
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green, 
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable. 
The human mortals want their winter here; 
No night is now with hymn or carol blest. 
Therefore the moon (the governess of floods), 
Pale in her anger, washes all the air, 
That rheumatic diseases do abound. 
And thorough this distemperature, we see 
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts 
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, 
And on old Hiems' [thin] and icy crown 
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 
Is, as in mockery, set; the spring, the summer, 
The childing autumn, angry winter, change 
Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,  
By their increase, now knows not which is which. 
And this same progeny of evils comes  
We are their parents and original. 
Do you amend it then; it lies in you. 
Why should Titania cross her Oberon? 
I do but beg a little changeling boy, 
To be my henchman. Set your heart at rest; 
The fairy land buys not the child of me. 
His mother was a vot'ress of my order, 
And in the spiced Indian air, by night, 
Full often hath she gossiped by my side, 
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands, 
Marking th' embarked traders on the flood; 
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive 
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; 
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait, 
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire) 
Would imitate, and sail upon the land 
To fetch me trifles, and return again, 
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. 
But she, being mortal, of that boy did  
And for her sake do I rear up her boy; 
And for her sake I will not part with him.  
How long within this wood intend you stay?  
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day. 
If you will patiently dance in our round, 
And see our moonlight revels, go with us; 
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts. 
Give me that boy, and I will go with thee. 
Not for thy fairy kingdom.  Fairies, away! 
We shall chide downright, if I longer stay. 
Well; go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove 
Till I torment thee for this injury. 
My gentle Puck, come hither.  Thou rememb'rest 
Since once I sat upon a promontory, 
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back 
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath 
That the rude sea grew civil at her song 
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres, 
To hear the sea-maid's music? I remember. 
That very time I saw (but thou couldst not),  
Flying between the cold moon and the earth, 
Cupid all armed.  A certain aim he took  
At a fair vestal throned by [the] west,  
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow, 
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts; 
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft 
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon, 
And the imperial vot'ress passed on, 
In maiden meditation, fancy-free. 
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell. 
It fell upon a little western flower, 
Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound, 
And maidens call it love-in-idleness. 
Fetch me that flow'r; the herb I showed thee once. 
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid 
Upon the next live creature that it sees. 
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again 
Ere the leviathan can swim a league. 
I'll put a girdle round about the earth 
In forty minutes. Having once this juice, 
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,  
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes; 
The next thing then she waking looks upon  
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,  
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape), 
She shall pursue it with the soul of love. 
And ere I take this charm from off her sight 
(As I can take it with another herb), 
I'll make her render up her page to me. 
But who comes here?  I am invisible, 
And I will overhear their conference. 
I love thee not; therefore pursue me not. 
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? 
The one I'll [slay]; the other [slayeth] me. 
Thou toldst me they were stol'n unto this wood; 
And here am I, and wode within this wood, 
Because I cannot meet my Hermia. 
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more. 
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant; 
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart 
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,  
And I shall have no power to follow you. 
Do I entice you?  Do I speak you fair?  
Or rather do I not in plainest truth  
Tell you I do not [nor] I cannot love you? 
And even for that do I love you the more: 
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius, 
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you. 
Use me but as your spaniel; spurn me, strike me, 
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave, 
Unworthy as I am, to follow you. 
What worser place can I beg in your love 
(And yet a place of high respect with me) 
Than to be used as you use your dog? 
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit, 
For I am sick when I do look on thee. 
And I am sick when I look not on you. 
You do impeach your modesty too much, 
To leave the city and commit yourself 
Into the hands of one that loves you not; 
To trust the opportunity of night, 
And the ill counsel of a desert place, 
With the rich worth of your virginity. 
Your virtue is my privilege.  For that  
It is not night when I do see your face, 
Therefore I think I am not in the night,  
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,  
For you in my respect are all the world. 
Then how can it be said I am alone, 
When all the world is here to look on me? 
I'll run from thee, and hide me in the brakes, 
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts. 
The wildest hath not such a heart as you. 
Run when you will; the story shall be changed: 
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase; 
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind 
Makes speed to catch the tiger -- bootless speed, 
When cowardice pursues and valor flies. 
I will not stay thy questions.  Let me go; 
Or if thou follow me, do not believe 
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood. 
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field, 
You do me mischief.  Fie, Demetrius! 
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. 
We cannot fight for love, as men may do. 
We should be wooed, and were not made to woo. 
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, 
To die upon the hand I love so well.
Fare thee well, nymph.  Ere he do leave this grove, 
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love. 
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer. 
Ay, there it is. I pray thee give it me. 
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows, 
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, 
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine, 
With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine; 
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night, 
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight; 
And there the snake throws her enamelled skin, 
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in; 
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes, 
And make her full of hateful fantasies. 
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove: 
A sweet Athenian lady is in love  
With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes, 
But do it when the next thing he espies  
May be the lady.  Thou shalt know the man  
By the Athenian garments he hath on. 
Effect it with some care, that he may prove 
More fond on her than she upon her love; 
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow. 
Fear not, my lord! your servant shall do so. 
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song; 
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence, 
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, 
Some war with rere-mice for their leathren wings 
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back 
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots and wonders 
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep; 
Then to your offices, and let me rest. 
Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood; 
And to speak troth I have forgot our way. 
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, 
And tarry for the comfort of the day.  
Be't so, Lysander.  Find you out a bed; 
For I upon this bank will rest my head.  
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both,  
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth. 
Nay, [good] Lysander; for my sake, my dear, 
Lie further off yet; do not lie so near. 
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence! 
Love takes the meaning in love's conference: 
I mean, that my heart unto yours [is] knit, 
So that but one heart we can make of it; 
Two bosoms interchained with an oath, 
So then two bosoms and a single troth. 
Then by your side no bed-room me deny; 
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie. 
Lysander riddles very prettily. 
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride, 
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. 
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy, 
Lie further off, in humane modesty; 
Such separation as may well be said 
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid, 
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend. 
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!  
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I, 
And then end life when I end loyalty!  
Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!  
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
Stay -- though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius. 
I charge thee hence, and do not haunt me thus. 
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so. 
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase! 
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. 
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, 
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes. 
How came her eyes so bright?  Not with salt tears; 
If so, my eyes are oft'ner washed than hers. 
No, no; I am as ugly as a bear; 
For beasts that meet me run away for fear. 
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius 
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. 
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne!  
But who is here? Lysander! on the ground? 
Dead, or asleep?  I see no blood, no wound.  
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.  
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. 
Transparent Helena, nature shows art, 
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. 
Where is Demetrius?  O, how fit a word 
Is that vile name to perish on my sword! 
Do not say so, Lysander, say not so. 
What though he love your Hermia?  Lord, what though? 
Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content. 
Content with Hermia?  No; I do repent 
The tedious minutes I with her have spent. 
Not Hermia, but Helena I love. 
Who will not change a raven for a dove? 
The will of man is by his reason swayed; 
And reason says you are the worthier maid. 
Things growing are not ripe until their season, 
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason; 
And touching now the point of human skill, 
Reason becomes the marshal to my will,  
And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook 
Love's stories written in Love's richest book.  
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?  
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? 
Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man, 
That I did never, no, nor never can, 
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye, 
But you must flout my insufficiency? 
Good troth, you do me wrong (good sooth, you do) 
In such disdainful manner me to woo. 
But fare you well; perforce I must confess 
I thought you lord of more true gentleness. 
O that a lady, of one man refused, 
Should of another therefore be abused!
She sees not Hermia.  Hermia, sleep thou there, 
And never mayst thou come Lysander near! 
For as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings, 
Or as the heresies that men do leave 
Are hated most of those they did deceive, 
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, 
Of all be hated, but the most of me!  
And, all my powers, address your love and might 
To honor Helen and to be her knight.
Help me, Lysander, help me!  do thy best 
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast! 
Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here! 
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear. 
Methought a serpent eat my heart away, 
And you sate smiling at his cruel prey. 
Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord! 
What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word? 
Alack, where are you?  Speak, and if you hear; 
Speak, of all loves!  I swoon almost with fear. 
No? then I well perceive you are not nigh: 
Either death, or you, I'll find immediately.
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play? 
What hempen home-spuns have we swagg'ring here, 
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen? 
What, a play toward? I'll be an auditor, 
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause. 
"Thisby, the flowers of odious savors sweet -- 
[Odorous], odorous. -- "odors savors sweet; 
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear. 
But hark; a voice! Stay thou but here a while, 
And by and by I will to thee appear."
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here. 
"If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine." 
Pray, masters, fly, masters! Help! 
I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,  
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,  
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire, 
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, 
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn. 
What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed? 
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. 
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note; 
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape; 
And thy fair virtue's force (perforce) doth move me 
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee. 
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful. 
Out of this wood do not desire to go; 
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no. 
I am a spirit of no common rate; 
The summer still doth tend upon my state; 
And I do love thee; therefore go with me. 
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee; 
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, 
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep. 
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so, 
That thou shalt like an aery spirit go. 
Peaseblossom!  Cobweb!  Moth! and Mustardseed! 
And I.  And I. And I. Where shall we go? 
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman, 
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes; 
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries, 
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries; 
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees, 
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs, 
And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes, 
To have my love to bed and to arise; 
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies, 
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. 
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies. 
Hail, mortal! Hail! Hail! Hail! 
Come wait upon him; lead him to my bower. 
The moon methinks looks with a wat'ry eye; 
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower, 
Lamenting some enforced chastity. 
Tie up my lover's tongue, bring him silently.  
I wonder if Titania be awaked; 
Then what it was that next came in her eye, 
Which she must dote on in extremity. 
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit? 
What night-rule now about this haunted grove? 
My mistress with a monster is in love. 
Near to her close and consecrated bower, 
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, 
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals, 
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, 
Were met together to rehearse a play 
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. 
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, 
Who Pyramus presented, in their sport, 
Forsook his scene, and ent'red in a brake; 
When I did him at this advantage take, 
An ass's nole I fixed on his head.  
Anon his Thisby must be answered, 
And forth my mimic comes.  When they him spy,  
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,  
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort 
(Rising and cawing at the gun's report), 
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky, 
So, at his sight, away his follows fly; 
And at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls, 
He murther cries, and help from Athens calls. 
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, 
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong, 
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch; 
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch. 
I led them on in this distracted fear, 
And left sweet Pyramus translated there; 
When in that moment (so it came to pass) 
Titania waked, and straightway loved an ass. 
This falls out better than I could devise. 
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes 
With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do? 
I took him sleeping (that is finished too)  
And the Athenian woman by his side; 
That when he waked, of force she must be eyed.  
Stand close; this is the same Athenian. 
This is the woman; but not this the man. 
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so? 
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe. 
Now I but chide; but I should use thee worse, 
For thou (I fear) hast given me cause to curse. 
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, 
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, 
The sun was not so true unto the day 
As he to me. Would he have stolen away 
From sleeping Hermia?  I'll believe as soon 
This whole earth may be bored, and that the moon 
May through the centre creep, and so displease 
Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes. 
It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him; 
So should a murtherer look -- so dead, so grim.  
So should the murthered look, and so should I, 
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.  
Yet you, the murtherer, look as bright, as clear,  
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere. 
What's this to my Lysander? Where is he? 
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me? 
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds. 
Out, dog, out, cur! thou driv'st me past the bounds 
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him then? 
Henceforth be never numb'red among men! 
O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake! 
Durst thou have looked upon him being awake? 
And hast thou killed him sleeping?  O brave touch! 
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much? 
An adder did it! for with doubler tongue 
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung. 
You spend your passion on a misprised mood. 
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood; 
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell. 
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well. 
And if I could, what should I get therefore? 
A privilege never to see me more.  
And from thy hated presence part I so
There is no following her in this fierce vein.  
Here therefore for a while I will remain. 
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow 
For debt that bankrout [sleep] doth sorrow owe; 
Which now in some slight measure it will pay, 
If for his tender here I make some stay. 
What hast thou done?  Thou hast mistaken quite, 
And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight. 
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue 
Some true love turned, and not a false turned true. 
Then fate o'errules, that one man holding troth, 
A million fail, confounding oath on oath. 
About the wood go swifter than the wind, 
And Helena of Athens look thou find. 
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer 
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. 
By some illusion see thou bring her here. 
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear. 
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?  
Scorn and derision never come in tears.  
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born, 
In their nativity all truth appears. 
How can these things in me seem scorn to you, 
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true? 
You do advance your cunning more and more; 
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray! 
These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er? 
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. 
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales, 
Will even weigh; and both as light as tales. 
I had no judgment when to her I swore. 
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er. 
Demetrius loves her; and he loves not you. 
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! 
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne? 
Crystal is muddy.  O, how ripe in show 
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! 
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,  
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow 
When thou hold'st up thy hand.  O, let me kiss  
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!  
O spite!  O hell!  I see you all are bent 
To set against me for your merriment. 
If you were civil and knew courtesy, 
You would not do me thus much injury. 
Can you not hate me, as I know you do, 
But you must join in souls to mock me too? 
If you were men, as men you are in show, 
You would not use a gentle lady so; 
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts, 
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts. 
You both are rivals, and love Hermia; 
And now both rivals, to mock Helena. 
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise, 
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes 
With your derision!  None of noble sort 
Would so offend a virgin, and extort 
A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport. 
You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so; 
For you love Hermia; this you know I know. 
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,  
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part; 
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,  
Whom I do love, and will do till my death.  
Never did mockers waste more idle breath. 
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none. 
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone. 
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, 
And now to Helen is it home returned, 
There to remain. Helen, it is not so. 
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, 
Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear. 
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear. 
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes, 
The ear more quick of apprehension makes; 
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, 
It pays the hearing double recompense. 
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found; 
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.  
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so? 
Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?  
What love could press Lysander from my side? 
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide -- 
Fair Helena! who more engilds the night 
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. 
Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know, 
The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so? 
You speak not as you think.  It cannot be. 
Lo! she is one of this confederacy. 
Now I perceive, they have conjoined all three 
To fashion this false sport, in spite of me. 
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid! 
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived 
Is all the counsel that we two have shared, 
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent, 
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 
For parting us -- O, is all forgot? 
All school-days friendship, childhood innocence? 
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,  
Have with our needles created both one flower, 
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,  
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,  
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds 
Had been incorporate. So we grew together, 
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted, 
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem; 
So with two seeming bodies, but one heart, 
Two of the first, [like] coats in heraldry, 
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest. 
And will you rent our ancient love asunder, 
To join with men in scorning your poor friend? 
It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly. 
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it, 
Though I alone do feel the injury. 
I am amazed at your [passionate] words. 
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me. 
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, 
To follow me and praise my eyes and face? 
And made your other love, Demetrius 
(Who even but now did spurn me with his foot), 
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,  
Precious, celestial?  Wherefore speaks he this 
To her he hates?  And wherefore doth Lysander  
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)  
But by your setting on, by your consent? 
What though I be not so in grace as you, 
So hung upon with love, so fortunate 
(But miserable most, to love unloved)? 
This you should pity rather than despise. 
I understand not what you mean by this. 
Ay, do! persever, counterfeit sad looks, 
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, 
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up; 
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled. 
If you have any pity, grace, or manners, 
You would not make me such an argument. 
But fare ye well; 'tis partly my own fault, 
Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy. 
Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse, 
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena! 
O excellent! Sweet, do not scorn her so. 
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.  
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat. 
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak [prays].  
Helen, I love thee, by my life I do! 
I swear by that which I will lose for thee, 
To prove him false that says I love thee not. 
I say I love thee more than he can do. 
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too. 
Quick, come! Lysander, whereto tends all this? 
Away, you Ethiop! No, no; he'll 
Seem to break loose -- take on as you would follow, 
But yet come not.  You are a tame man, go! 
Hang off, thou cat, thou bur!  Vile thing, let loose; 
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent! 
Why are you grown so rude?  What change is this, 
Sweet love? Thy love?  Out, tawny Tartar, out! 
Do you not jest?  Yes, sooth; and so do you. 
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.  
I would I had your bond, for I perceive  
A weak bond holds you.  I'll not trust your word. 
What? should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead? 
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so. 
What? can you do me greater harm than hate? 
Hate me, wherefore?  O me, what news, my love! 
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander? 
I am as fair now as I was erewhile. 
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left me: 
Why then, you left me (O, the gods forbid!) 
In earnest, shall I say? Ay, by my life; 
And never did desire to see thee more. 
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt; 
Be certain! nothing truer; 'tis no jest 
That I do hate thee, and love Helena. 
O me, you juggler, you canker-blossom, 
You thief of love!  What, have you come by night 
And stol'n my love's heart from him?  Fine, i' faith! 
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,  
No touch of bashfulness?  What, will you tear  
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue? 
Fie, de, you counterfeit, you puppet. you! 
"Puppet"?  Why so?  Ay, that way goes the game. 
Now I  perceive that she hath made compare 
Between our statures: she hath urged her height, 
And with her personage, her tall personage, 
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him. 
And are you grown so high in his esteem, 
Because I are so dwarfish and so low? 
How low am I, thou painted maypole?  Speak! 
How low am I?  I am not yet so low 
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes. 
I pray you, though you mock me, [gentlemen], 
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst; 
I have no gift at all in shrewishness; 
I am a right maid for my cowardice. 
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, 
Because she is something lower than myself, 
That I can match her.  "Lower"? hark again. 
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.  
I evermore did love you, Hermia,  
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you; 
Save that, in love unto Demetrius, 
I told him of your stealth unto this wood. 
He followed you; for love I followed him. 
But he hath chid me hence, and threat'ned me 
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too. 
And now, so you will let me quiet go, 
To Athens will I bear my folly back, 
And follow you no further. Let me go. 
You see how simple and how fond I am. 
Why, get you gone.  Who is't that hinders you? 
A foolish heart, that I leave here behind. 
What, with Lysander? With Demetrius.  
Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena. 
No, sir; she shall not, though you take her part.  
O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd! 
She was a vixen when she went to school; 
And though she be but little, she is fierce. 
"Little" again?  Nothing but "low" and "little"? 
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus? 
Let me come to her. Get you gone, you dwarf; 
You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made; 
You bead, you acorn. You are too officious 
In her behalf that scorns your services. 
Let her alone; speak not of Helena, 
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend 
Never so little show of love to her, 
Thou shalt aby it. Now she holds me not; 
Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right, 
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena. 
Follow?  Nay; I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.  
Nay, go not back.  I will not trust you, I, 
Nor longer stay in your curst company. 
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray; 
My legs are longer though, to run away.
I am amazed, and know not what to say.  
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st, 
Or else commit'st thy knaveries willfully. 
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook. 
Did not you tell me I should know the man 
By the Athenian garments he had on? 
And so far blameless proves my enterprise, 
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes; 
And so far am I glad it so did sort, 
As this their jangling I esteem a sport. 
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight; 
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night; 
The starry welkin cover thou anon 
With drooping fog as black as Acheron, 
And lead these testy rivals so astray 
As one come not within another's way.  
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue; 
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;  
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;  
And from each other look thou lead them thus, 
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep 
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. 
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye; 
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property, 
To take from thence all error with his might, 
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. 
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend 
With league whose date till death shall never end. 
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, 
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy; 
And then I will her charmed eye release 
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace. 
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste, 
For Night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, 
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger, 
At whose approach, ghosts, wand'ring here and there, 
Troop home to churchyards.  Damned spirits all,  
That in crossways and floods have burial, 
Already to their wormy beds are gone.  
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,  
They willfully themselves exile from light, 
And must for aye consort with black-browed Night. 
But we are spirits of another sort. 
I with the Morning's love have oft made sport, 
And like a forester, the groves may tread 
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, 
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams, 
Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. 
But not withstanding, haste, make no delay; 
We may effect this business yet ere day.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius?  Speak thou now. 
Here, villain, drawn and ready.  Where art thou?  
I will be with thee straight. Follow me then  
To plainer ground.  Lysander, speak again! 
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled? 
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head? 
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, 
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars, 
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child, 
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled 
That draws a sword on thee. Yea, art thou there? 
Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.
He goes before me, and still dares me on. 
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.  
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I; 
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,  
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,  
And here will rest me.  Come, thou gentle day! 
For if but once thou show me thy grey light, 
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.   
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not? 
Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot 
Thou run'st before me, shifting every place, 
And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face. 
Where art thou now? Come hither; I am here. 
Nay then thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear, 
If ever I thy face by daylight see. 
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me 
To measure out my length on this cold bed. 
By day's approach look to be visited. 
O weary night, O long and tedious night, 
Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east, 
That I may back to Athens by daylight, 
From these that my poor company detest. 
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, 
Steal me a while from mine own company.   
Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, 
I can no further crawl, no further go; 
My legs can keep no pace with my desires. 
Here will I rest me till the break of day. 
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!  
Come sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed, 
While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, 
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head, 
And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy. 
Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed.  
Pray you, leave your curtsy, good mounsieur. 
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.  
Fairies, be gone, and be [all ways] away. 
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle  
Gently entwist; the female ivy so 
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. 
O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!  
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight? 
Her dotage now I do begin to pity. 
For meeting her of late behind the wood, 
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool, 
I did upbraid her, and fall out with her. 
For she his hairy temples then had rounded 
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers; 
And that same dew which sometime on the buds 
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, 
Stood now within the pretty flouriets'' eyes, 
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. 
When I had at my pleasure taunted her, 
I then did ask of her her changeling child; 
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent  
To bear him to my bower in fairy land. 
And now I have the boy, I will undo 
This hateful imperfection of her eyes. 
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp 
From off the head of this Athenian swain,  
That he, awaking when the other do, 
May all to Athens back again repair,  
And think no more of this night's accidents  
But as the fierce vexation of a dream. 
But first I will release the Fairy Queen. 
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen. 
My Oberon, what visions have I seen! 
Methought I was enamored of an ass. 
There lies your love. How came these things to pass? 
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now! 
Silence a while. Robin, take off this head. 
Titania, music call, and strike more dead 
Than common sleep of all these [five] the sense. 
Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep! 
Now, when thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes peep.  
Sound, music!   Come, my queen, take hands with me,  
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.  
Now thou and I are new in amity, 
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly 
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly, 
And bless it to all fair prosperity. 
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be 
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity. 
Go, one of you, find out the forester, 
For now our observation is performed,  
And since we have the vaward of the day,  
My love shall hear the music of my hounds. 
Uncouple in the western valley, let them go. 
Dispatch, I say, and find the forester. 
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, 
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, 
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear 
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear 
Such gallant chiding; for besides the groves, 
The skies, the fountains, every region near 
Seem all one mutual cry. I never heard 
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder. 
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind; 
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung 
With ears that sweep away the morning dew; 
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls; 
Slow in pursuit; but matched in mouth like bells, 
Each under each. A cry more tuneable  
Was never hollowed to, nor cheered with horn, 
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.  
Judge when you hear.  But soft!  What nymphs are these? 
My lord, this' my daughter here asleep, 
And this Lysander, this Demetrius is, 
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena. 
I wonder of their being here together. 
No doubt they rose up early to observe 
The rite of May; and hearing our intent, 
Came here in grace of our solemnity. 
But speak, Egeus, is not this the day 
That Hermia should give answer of her choice? 
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns. 
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past; 
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now? 
Pardon, my lord. I pray you all, stand up. 
I know you two are rival enemies.  
How comes this gentle concord in the world, 
That hatred is so far from jealousy  
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?  
My lord, I shall reply amazedly, 
Half sleep, half waking; but, as yet, I swear, 
I cannot truly say how I came here. 
But, as I think -- for truly would I speak, 
And now I do bethink me, so it is -- 
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent 
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might, 
Without the peril of the Athenian law -- 
Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough. 
I beg the law, the law, upon his head. 
They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius, 
Thereby to have defeated you and me: 
You of your wife, and me of my consent, 
Of my consent that she should be your wife. 
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, 
Of this their purpose hither to this wood, 
And I in fury hither followed them, 
Fair Helena in fancy following me. 
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power 
(But by some power it is), my love to Hermia  
(Melted as the snow) seems to me now 
As the remembrance of an idle gaud,  
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;  
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, 
The object and the pleasure of mine eye, 
Is only Helena. To her, my lord, 
Was I betrothed ere I [saw] Hermia; 
But like a sickness did I loathe this food; 
But, as in health, come to my natural taste, 
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it, 
And will for evermore be true to it. 
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met; 
Of this discourse we more will hear anon. 
Egeus, I will overbear your will; 
For in the temple, by and by, with us 
These couples shall eternally be knit. 
And, for the morning now is something worn 
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside. 
Away with us to Athens. Three and three, 
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity. 
These things seem small and undistinguishable,  
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds. 
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,  
When every thing seems double.  So methinks; 
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel, 
Mine own, and not mine own. Are you sure 
That we are awake? It seems to me 
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think 
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him? 
Yea, and my father. And Hippolyta. 
And he did bid us follow to the temple. 
Why then, we are awake. Let's follow him, 
And by the way let's recount our dreams. 
'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of. 
More strange than true. I never may believe 
These antic fables, nor these fairy toys. 
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, 
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend 
More than cool reason ever comprehends. 
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet 
Are of imagination all compact. 
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold; 
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic, 
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt. 
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, 
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;  
And as imagination bodies forth 
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen  
Turns them to shapes, and gives to aery nothing  
A local habitation and a name. 
That if it would but apprehend some joy, 
It comprehends some bringer of that joy; 
Or in the night, imagining some fear, 
How easy is a bush supposed a bear! 
But all the story of the night told over, 
And all their minds transfigured so together, 
More witnesseth than fancy's images, 
And grows to something of great constancy; 
But howsoever, strange and admirable. 
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth. 
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love 
Accompany your hearts! More than to us 
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!  
Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,  
To wear away this long age of three hours  
Between [our] after-supper and bed-time? 
Where is our usual manager of mirth? 
What revels are in hand? Is there no play 
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour? 
Call Philostrate. Here, mighty Theseus. 
Say, what abridgment have you for this evening? 
What masque? what music?  How shall we beguile 
The lazy time, if not with some delight? 
There is a brief how many sports are ripe. 
Make choice of which your Highness will see first. 
"The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung 
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp." 
We'll none of that: that have I told my love, 
In glory of my kinsman Hercules. 
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, 
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."  
That is an old device; and it was played 
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.  
"The thrice three Muses mourning for the death  
Of Learning, late deceased in beggary." 
That is some satire, keen and critical, 
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. 
"A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus 
And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth." 
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief? 
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. 
How shall we find the concord of this discord? 
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long, 
Which is as brief as I have known a play; 
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, 
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play 
There is not one word apt, one player fitted. 
And tragical, my noble lord, it is; 
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself; 
Which when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, 
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears 
The passion of loud laughter never shed. 
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here, 
Which never labored in their minds till now;  
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories  
With this same play, against your nuptial. 
And we will hear it. No, my noble lord, 
It is not for you. I have heard it over, 
And it is nothing, nothing in the world; 
Unless you can find sport in their intents, 
Extremely stretched, and conned with cruel pain, 
To do you service. I will hear that play; 
For never any thing can be amiss, 
When simpleness and duty tender it. 
Go bring them in; and take your places, ladies. 
I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharged, 
And duty in his service perishing. 
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing. 
He says they can do nothing in this kind. 
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.  
Our sport shall be to take what the mistake; 
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed 
To greet me with premeditated welcomes; 
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale, 
Make periods in the midst of sentences, 
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears, 
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off, 
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet, 
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome; 
And in the modesty of fearful duty 
I read as much as from the rattling tongue 
Of saucy and audacious eloquence. 
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity 
In least speak most, to my capacity. 
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed. 
If we offend, it is with our good will.  
That you should think, we come not to offend,  
But with good will. To show our simple skill, 
That is the true beginning of our end. 
We do not come, as minding to content you, 
Our true intent is.  All for your delight 
We are not here. That you should here repent you, 
The actors are at hand; and, by their show, 
You shall know all, that you are like to know. 
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;  
But wonder on till truth make all things plain.  
This man is Pyramus, if you would know; 
This beauteous lady Thisby is certain. 
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present 
Wall, that vile Wall, which did these lovers sunder; 
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content 
To whisper. At the which let no man wonder. 
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn, 
Presenteth Moonshine; for if you will know, 
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn 
To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo. 
This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name, 
The trusty Thisby, coming first by night, 
Did scare away, or rather did affright; 
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall, 
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. 
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall, 
And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain; 
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, 
He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast; 
And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,  
His dagger drew, and died.  For all the rest, 
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain  
At large discourse, while here they do remain.  
I wonder if the lion be to speak. 
In this same enterlude it doth befall 
That I, one [Snout] by name, present a wall; 
And such a wall, as I would have you think, 
That had in it a crannied hole or chink, 
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby, 
Did whisper often, very secretly. 
This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone doth show 
That I am that same wall; the truth is so, 
And this the cranny is, right and sinister, 
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper. 
Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence!  
O grim-looked night!  O night with hue so black! 
O night, which ever art when day is not! 
O night, O night! alack, alack, alack, 
I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot! 
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall, 
That stand'st between her father's ground and mine! 
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall, 
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne! 
Thanks, courteous wall; Jove shield thee well for this! 
But what see I? No Thisby do I see. 
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss! 
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me! 
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, 
For parting my fair Pyramus and me! 
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones, 
Thy stones with lime and hair knit [up in thee]. 
I see a voice! Now will I to the chink, 
To spy and I can hear my Thisby's face. 
Thisby! My love thou art, my love I think. 
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace; 
And, like Limander, am I trusty still. 
And I, like Helen, till the Fates me kill. 
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true. 
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you. 
O, kiss me through the hole of this vild wall! 
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all. 
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway? 
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay. 
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so; 
And being done, thus Wall away doth go.  
Now is the moon used between the two neighbors.  
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so  
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard. 
The best in this kind are but shadows; and 
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear 
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor, 
May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here, 
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. 
Then know that I as Snug the joiner am 
A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam, 
For, if I should, as lion, come in strife 
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life. 
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience. 
This lion is a very fox for his valor.  
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present -- 
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present; 
Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be. 
This is the greatest error of all the rest. 
This is old Ninny's tomb.  Where is my love? 
O! Well roared, Lion. Well run, Thisby. 
Well moused, Lion.  And then came Pyramus.   
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams; 
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright; 
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering [gleams], 
I trust to take of truest Thisby sight. 
What dreadful dole is here! Eyes, do you see? 
How can it be? O  dainty duck!  O dear! 
Thy mantle good, What, stained with blood? 
Approach, ye Furies fell! O Fates, come, come, 
Cut thread and thrum, Quail, crush, conclude, and quell! 
This passion, and the death of a dear friend,  
Would go near to make a man look sad. 
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.  
O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?  
Since lion vild hath here deflow'red my dear; 
Which is -- no, no -- which was the fairest dame 
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. 
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead. 
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. 
Lovers, to bed, 'tis almost fairy time. 
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn 
As much as we this night have overwatched. 
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled 
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed. 
A fortnight hold we this solemnity, 
In nightly revels and new jollity.
