<OTHvs> [Tush,] never tell me! I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Thou toldst me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he (as loving his own pride and purposes)
Evades them with a bumbast circumstance
Horribly stuffed with epithites of war,
Nonsuits my mediators; for, "Certes," says he,
"I have already chose my officer." 
Forsooth, a great arithmetician, 
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine 
(A fellow almost damned in a fair wife),
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster -- unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the [toged] consuls can propose
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on [other] grounds
Christened and heathen, must be beleeed and calmed
He (in good time!) must his lieutenant be,
And I [(God] bless the mark!) his Moorship's ancient.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
Why, there's no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service;
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to th' first. Now, sir, be judge yourself 
Whether I in any just term am affined
To love the Moor. I would not follow him then. 
I follow him to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That (doting on his own obsequious bondage)
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashiered.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.
In following him, I follow but myself;
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, 
But seeming so, for my peculiar end;
For when my outward action doth demonstrate 
The native act and figure of my heart 
In complement extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.
What a [full] fortune does the thick-lips owe
If he can carry,t thus! Call up her father
Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such [changes] of vexation on't,
Here is her father's house, I'll call aloud.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
What ho! Brabantio, Signior Brabantio, ho!
Awake! what ho, Brabantio! thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
What is the reason of this terrible summons? 
Are your doors locked? Why? Wherefore ask you this?
['Zounds,] sir, y' are robbed! For shame, put on your gown;
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
Arise, I say! What, have you lost your wits?
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
Sir, sir, sir -- But thou must needs be sure
My spirits and my place have in their power
To make this bitter to thee. Patience, good sir.
What tell'st thou me of robbing? This is Venice;
My house is not a grange. Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you.
Thou art a villain. You are a senator. 
This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo.
If't be your pleasure and most wise consent
(As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard
But with a knave of common hire, a gundolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor --
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That, from the sense of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.
Your daughter (if you have not given her leave),
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and every where. Straight satisfy yourself. 
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state 
For thus deluding you. Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper! Call up all my people!
This accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light! Farewell; for I must leave you.
It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,
To be producted (as, if I stay, I shall)
Against the Moor; for I do know the state
(How ever this may gall him with some check)
Cannot with safety cast him, for he's embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars
(Which even now stands in act) that, for their souls,
Another of his fadom they have none
To lead their business; in which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell-pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love,
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him, 
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search;
And there will I be with him. So farewell. 
It is too true an evil; gone she is;
And what's to come of my despised time
Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her? -- O unhappy girl! --
With the Moor, say'st thou? -- Who would be a father! --
How didst thou know 'twas she? -- O, she deceives me
Past thought! -- What said she to you? -- Get moe tapers;
Raise all my kindred. -- Are they married, think you?
O heaven! how got she out? O treason of the blood!
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
By what you see them act. Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing? Yes, sir, I have indeed.
Call up my brother. -- O would you had had her! -- 
Some one way, some another. -- Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard and go along with me.
Pray you lead on. At every house I'll call
(I may command at most). -- Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of [night]. --
On, good Roderigo, I will deserve your pains.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th' conscience
To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity
Sometime to do me service. Nine or ten times
I had thought t' have yerked him here under the ribs.
'Tis better as it is. Nay, but he prated,
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
That with the little godliness I have
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir, 
Are you fast married? Be assured of this, 
That the magnifico is much beloved,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the Duke's. He will divorce you,
Or put upon you what restraint or Grievance
The law (with all his might to enforce it on) 
Will give him cable. Let him do his spite; 
My services which I have done the signiory 
Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know --
Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
I shall [provulgate] -- I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege, and my demerits
May speak, unbonneted, to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reached; for know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhoused free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea's worth. But look, what lights come yond?
Those are the raised father and his friends.
You were best go in. Not I; I must be found.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
The servants of the [Duke]? and my lieutenant?
The goodness of the night upon you, friends! 
What is the news? The Duke does greet you, general, 
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, 
Even on the instant. What is the matter, think you?
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine;
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another's heels;
And many of the consuls, raised and met,
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out. 'Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you. Ancient, what makes he here?
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carract.
If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.
I do not understand. He's married. To who?
Marry, to -- Come, captain, will you go? Have with you.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
He comes to bad intent. Holla, stand there!
Signior, it is the Moor. Down with him, thief!
You, Roderigo! come, sir, I am for you.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter?
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
For I'll refer me to all things of sense, 
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, 
So opposite to marriage that she shunned 
The wealthy curled [darlings] of our nation,
Would ever have, t' incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou -- to fear, not to delight!
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense,
That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I'll have't disputed on,
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practicer
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist
Subdue him at his peril. Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining, and the rest.
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go
Call thee to answer. What if [I] do obey? 
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him? 'Tis true, most worthy signior;
The Duke's in council, and your noble self
I am sure is sent for. How? the Duke in council?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
There's no composition in [these] news 
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys. 
But though they jump not on a just accompt
(As in these cases where the aim reports,
'Tis oft with difference], yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.
I do not so secure me in the error
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense. What ho, what ho, what ho!
A messenger from the galleys. Now? what's the business?
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the state
How say you by this change? This cannot be
By no assay of reason; 'tis a pageant 
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk, 
And let ourselves again but understand 
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks th' abilities
That Rhodes is dressed in -- if we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain
To wake and wage a danger profitless.
Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
Of thirty sail; and now they do restem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano, 
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus, 
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
Write from us to him, post-post-haste. Dispatch!
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior,
We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
So did I yours. Good your Grace, pardon me:
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of business,
Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care
Take hold on me; for my particular grief 
Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows, 
And it is still itself. Why? what's the matter?
My daughter! O, my daughter! Dead? Ay, to me:
She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so prepost'rously to err
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense)
Who e'er he be that in this foul proceeding
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself,
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
After your own sense; yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action. Humbly I thank your Grace.
Here is the man -- this Moor, whom now, it seems,
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought. We are very sorry for't. 
What, in your own part, can you say to this? 
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approved good masters:
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
It is most true; true I have married her,;
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field;
And little of this great world can I speak
More than pertains to feats of broils and battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet (by your gracious patience)
I will a round unvarnished tale deliver
Of my whole course of love -- what drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic
(For such proceeding I am charged withal) 
I won his daughter. A maiden, never bold; 
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion 
Blushed at herself; and she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, every thing,
To fall in love with what she feared to look on!
It is a judgment mained, and most imperfect,
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
That with some mixtures pow'rful o'er the blood,
Or with some dram (conjured to this effect)
He wrought upon her. To vouch this is no proof,
Without more wider and more [overt] test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth? I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary, 
And let her speak of me before her father. 
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life. Fetch Desdemona hither.
Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place. 
And, [till] she come, as truly as to heaven 
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I'll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love,
Her father loved me, oft invited me;
Still questioned me the story of my life
From year to year -- the [battles], sieges, [fortunes],
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To th' very moment that he bade me tell it;
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving accidents by flood and field,
Of hair-breadth scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach,
Of being taken by the insolent foe
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence
And portance in my [travel's] history;
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks,[and] hills whose [heads] touch heaven, 
It was my hint to speak -- such was my process --
And of the Cannibals that each [other] eat, 
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads 
[Do grow] beneath their shoulders. These things to hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline;
But still the house affairs would draw her [thence],
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She'ld come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not [intentively]. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of [sighs];
She swore, in faith 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me, 
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story, 
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake: 
She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
And I loved her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have us,d.
Here comes the lady; let her witness it.
I think this tale would win my daughter too.
Take up this mangled matter at the best;
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands. I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head if my bad blame
Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress.
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience? My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
To you I am bound for life and education;
My life and education both do learn me 
How to respect you; you are the lord of duty;
I am hitherto your daughter. But here's my husband; 
And so much duty as my mother showed 
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs.
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.
Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step, may help these lovers
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone 
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when Fortune takes, 
Patience her injury a mock'ry makes. 
The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not, so long as we can smile.
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences, to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
But words are words; I never yet did hear
That the bruised heart was pierced through the [ear].
I humbly beseech you proceed to th' affairs of state.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators, 
Hath made the flinty and steel [couch] of war 
My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness; and do undertake
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding. [If you please,
Be't] at her father's. I will not have it so.
Nor I. Nor [I; I would not] there reside,
To put my father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most gracious Duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,
And let me find a charter in your voice
That I [did] love the Moor to live with him,
My downright violence, and storm of fortunes, 
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued 
Even to the very quality of my lord.
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
And to his honors and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for why I love him are bereft me,
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat (the young affects
In [me] defunct) and proper satisfaction;
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls, that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
[For] she is with me. No, when light-winged toys
Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and officed [instruments], 
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm, 
And all indign and base adversities 
Make head against my estimation!
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going; th' affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it. You must away tonight.
tonight, my lord? This night. With all my heart.
At nine i' th' morning here we'll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind,
And he shall our commission bring to you;
And such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you. So please your Grace, my ancient;
A man he is of honesty and trust.
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me. Let it be so.
Good night to every one. And, noble signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack, 
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black. 
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see;
She has deceived her father, and may thee.
My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of wordly matter and direction,
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such [a] snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
[H'as] done my office. I know not if't be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him. 
Cassio's a proper man. Let me see now:
To get his place and to plume up my will 
ln double knavery -- How? how? -- Let's see -- 
After some time, to abuse Othello's [ear]
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose
To be suspected -- framed to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature,
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by th' nose
I have't. It is engend'red. Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?
Nothing at all, it is a high-wrought flood.
I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land,
A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements.
If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea, 
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this? 
A segregation of the Turkish fleet: 
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the guards of th' ever-fixed Pole;
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed flood. If that the Turkish fleet
Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned;
It is impossible to bear it out.
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks,
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
How? is this true? The ship is here put in, 
A Veronesa; Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello, 
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea, 
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
I am glad on't; 'tis a worthy governor.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And [prays] the Moor be safe; for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest. Pray [heaven] he be;
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let's to the sea-side, ho!
As well to see the vessel that's come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue
An indistinct regard. Come, let's do so;
Thanks you, the valiant of [this] warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens 
Give him defense against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea. 
His bark is stoutly timbered, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes (not surfeited to death)
Stand in bold cure. "A sail, a sail, a sail!"
The town is empty; on the brow o' th' sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry, "A sail!"
My hopes do shape him for the governor.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy;
Our friends at least. I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?
Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid
That paragons description and wild fame;
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in th' essential vesture of creation 
Does tire the [ingener]. How now? who has put in? 
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
H'as had most favorable and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The guttered rocks and congregated sands,
Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel,
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona. What is she?
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own pow'rful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits,
[And bring all Cyprus comfort!] O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore! 
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees. 
Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheel thee round! I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell [me] of my lord?
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he's well and will be shortly here.
O, but I fear -- How lost you company?
The great contention of [the] sea and skies
Parted our fellowship. "A sail, a sail!" 
They give [their] greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend. See for the news.
Good ancient, you are welcome. mistress.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners; 'tis my breeding 
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips 
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough. Alas! she has no speech.
I find it still, when I have [list] to sleep.
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
Come on, come on; you are pictures out [a' doors],
Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.
You shall not write my praise. No, let me not.
What wouldst write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?
O gentle lady, do not put me to't, 
For I am nothing if not critical. 
Come on, assay. -- There's one gone to the harbor?
I am not merry; but I do beguile
The thing I am by seeming otherwise. --
I am about it, but indeed my invention
Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze,
It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors,
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
The one's for use, the other useth it.
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She'll find a white that shall her blackness [hit].
Worse and worse. How if fair and foolish?
She never yet was foolish that was fair,
For even her folly helped her to an heir.
There's none so foul and foolish thereunto, 
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
She that was ever fair, and never proud,
Had tongue at will, and yet was never loud,
Never lacked gold, and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said, "Now I may";
She that being ang'red, her revenge being nigh,
Bade her wrong stay, and her displeasure fly;
She that in wisdom never was so frail
To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;
She that could think, and nev'r disclose her mind, 
See suitors following, and not look behind:
She was a wight (if ever such [wight] were) -- 
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him
more in the soldier than in the scholar.
O my fair warrior! My dear Othello!
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have wakened death!
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus-high, and duck again as low
As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate. The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
I cannot speak enough of this content,
It stops me here; it is too much of joy.
And this, and this, the greatest discords be 
But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am. Come; let us to the castle.
News, friends: our wars are done; the Turks are drowned.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus,
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel;
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,
Lay thy finger thus; and let thy soul be instructed.
Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe't; 
That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit.
The Moor (howbeit that I endure him not)
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
I stand accomptant for as great a sin),
But partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leaped into my seat; the thought whereof
Doth (like a poisonous mineral) gnaw my inwards;
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am evened with him, wife for wife;
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the [rank] garb 
(For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too),
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me, 
For making him egregiously an ass, 
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. 'Tis here; but yet confused,
Knavery's plain face is never seen till used. 
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight. 
Let's teach ourselves that honorable stop, 
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to't. Iago is most honest.
Michael, good night. tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you. --
Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.
Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature. 
An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
Here, at the door; I pray you call them in.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he hath drunk tonight already, 
He'll be as full of quarrel and offense 
As my young mistress' dog. Now, my sick fool 
Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits
That hold their honors in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Now 'mongst this flock of drunkards
Am I [to put] our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come.
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
'Fore [God], they have given me a rouse already.
"And let me the canakin clink, clink; 
Some wine, boys! 'Fore [God], an excellent song.
Is your [Englishman] so exquisite in his drinking?
I am for it, lieutenant; and I'll do you justice.
To th' platform, masters, come, let's set the watch. 
You see this fellow that is gone before:
He's a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction; and do but see his vice,
'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island. But is he often thus?
'Tis evermore [the] prologue to his sleep.
He'll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle. It were well
The general were put in mind of it. 
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature 
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
So to the Moor. Not I, for this fair island.
I do love Cassio well; and would do much
But hark, what noise? ['Zounds,] you rogue! you rascal!
Away, I say; go out and cry a mutiny. 
Nay, good lieutenant -- [God's will], gentlemen --
Help ho! -- lieutenant -- sir -- Montano -- [sir] --
Help, masters! -- Here's a goodly watch indeed!
Who's that which rings the bell? ho!
The town will rise. [God's will], lieutenant, [hold]!
What is the matter here? ['Zounds,] I bleed still,
I am hurt to th' death. He dies. Hold, for your lives!
Hold ho! Lieutenant -- sir -- Montano -- gentlemen --
Have you forgot all place of sense and duty? 
Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, for shame! 
Why, how now ho? from whence ariseth this?
Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl.
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak: who began this? On thy love, I charge thee!
I do not know. Friends all, but now, even now;
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now
(As if some planet had unwitted men),
Swords out, and tilting one at other's [breast],
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it. 
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak. 
Worthy Montano, you were wont to be civil; 
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted, and your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer, Iago, can inform you --
While I spare speech, which something now offends me --
Of all that I do know, nor know I aught
By me that's said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us. Now by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Assays to lead the way. ['Zounds,] if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you 
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began; who set it on; 
And he that is approved in this offense, 
Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What, in a town of war,
Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel?
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
If partially affined, or [leagued] in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier. Touch me not so near;
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio;
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. [Thus] it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause;
Myself the crying fellow did pursue, 
Lest by his clamor (as it so fell out)
The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot, 
Outran my purpose; and I returned [the] rather 
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
And Cassio high in oath; which till tonight
I ne'er might say before. When I came back
(For this was brief), I found them close together
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
From him that fled some strange indignity
Which patience could not pass. I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be officer of mine.
Look if my gentle love be not raised up!
What is the matter, dear? All's well [now], sweeting; 
Come away to bed. Sir, for your hurts, 
Myself will be your surgeon. -- Lead him off.
Iago, look with care about the town,
And silence those whom this vild brawl distracted.
Come, Desdemona, 'tis the soldiers' life
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
And what's he then that says I play the villain, 
When this advice is free I give, and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course 
To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy 
Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit; she's framed as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor, were['t] to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
His soul is so enfettered to her love,
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then a villain,
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now; for whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I'll pour this pestilence into his ear --
That she repeals him for her body's lust,
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor. 
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net 
That shall enmesh them all. How now, Roderigo?
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know'st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou by that small hurt [hast] cashiered Cassio.
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself a while. [By the mass], 'tis morning;
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee, go where thou art billeted. 
Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone. Two things are to be done: 
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress --
Myself a while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way;
Dull not device by coldness and delay. 
Masters, play here, I will content your pains;
Something that's brief; and bid "Good morrow, general."
Why, masters, have your instruments been in
Naples, that they speak i' th' nose thus? How, sir? how?
[Do, good my friend.] In happy time, Iago.
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her 
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona 
And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way that your converse and business
May be more free. I humbly thank you for't. 
I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest.
Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
For your displeasure; but all will sure be well.
The general and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus,
And great affinity; and that in wholesome wisdom
And needs no other suitor but his likings
[To take the safest occasion by the front]
To bring you in again. Yet I beseech you, 
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse 
With Desdemon alone. Pray you come in.
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely. I am much bound to you. 
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
And by him do my duties to the Senate.
That done, I will be walking on the works;
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
O, that's an honest fellow. Do not doubt,
But I will have my lord and you again 
As friendly as you were. Bounteous madam,
What ever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never any thing but your true servant.
I know't; I thank you. You do love my lord;
You have known him long, and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance. Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstances,
That I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.
Do not doubt that; before Emilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest,
I'll watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift, 
I'll intermingle every thing he does
With Cassio's suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio, 
For thy solicitor shall rather die 
Madam, not now; I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes. do your discretion. 
Hah? I like not that. What dost thou say?
Nothing, my lord; or if -- I know not what. 
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife? 
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it,
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing your coming. I do believe 'twas he.
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face.
I prithee call him back. Went he hence now?
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
Not now, sweet Desdemon, some other time. 
But shall't be shortly? The sooner, sweet, for you. 
Shall't be tonight at supper? No, not tonight.
tomorrow dinner then? I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.
Why then tomorrow night, [or] Tuesday morn;
On Tuesday noon, or night; on We'n'sday morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. In faith, he's penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason
(Save that they say the wars must make example
Out of her best), is not almost a fault
T' incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul
What you would ask me that I should deny,
Or stand so mamm'ring on. What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta'en your part -- to have so much to do
To bring him in! [By'r lady], I could do much -- 
Prithee no more; let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing. Why, this is not a boon; 
'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted. I will deny thee nothing;
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
Emilia, come. -- Be as your fancies teach you;
What e'er you be, I am obedient. 
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul
But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
My noble lord -- What dost thou say, Iago? 
Did Michael Cassio, when [you] wooed my lady, 
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?
But for a satisfaction of my thought,
No further harm. Why of thy thought, Iago?
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
Think, my lord? [By heaven], thou echo'st me,
As if there were some monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something. 
I heard thee say even now, thou lik'st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like? 
And when I told thee he was of my counsel 
[In] my whole course of wooing, thou criedst," Indeed!"
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
My lord, you know I love you. I think thou dost;
And for I know thou'rt full of love and honesty,
And weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more;
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just
They're close dilations, working from the heart,
That passion cannot rule. For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.
I think so too. Men should be what they seem,
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.
I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, 
The worst of words. Good my lord, pardon me:
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free [to].
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vild and false,
As where's that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so pure
[But some] uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law-days and in sessions sit
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think'st him wronged, and mak'st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts. I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess
(As I confess it is my nature's plague
To spy into abuses, and [oft] my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not), that your wisdom [then],
From one that so imperfectly [conjects], 
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance. 
It were not for your quiet nor your good, 
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
Ha? O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o'er 
Who dotes, yet doubts; suspects, yet [strongly] loves!
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough, 
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good [God], the souls of all my tribe defend
Think'st thou I'ld make a life of jealousy?
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No! to be once in doubt
Is [once] to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat,
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such [exsufflicate] and [blown] surmises,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealious
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances [well];
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
I'll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this -- 
Away at once with love or jealousy!
I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason 
To show the love and duty that I bear you 
With franker spirit; therefore (as I am bound)
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio,
Wear your eyes thus, not jealious nor secure.
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abused; look to't.
I know our country disposition well:
In Venice they do let [God] see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience
Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown.
She did deceive her father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,
She that so young could give out such a seeming
To seel her father's eyes up, close as oak,
He thought 'twas witchcraft -- but I am much to blame; 
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
Not a jot, not a jot. [I' faith], I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from [my] love. But I do see y' are moved.
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
I will not. Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vild success
Which my thoughts aimed not. Cassio's my worthy friend --
My lord, I see y' are moved. No, not much moved:
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.
Long live she so! and long live you to think so!
And yet how nature erring from itself --
Ay, there's the point; as (to be bold with you) 
Not to affect many proposed matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree, 
Whereto we see in all things nature tends -- 
Foh, one may smell in such, a will most rank,
Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural.
But (pardon me) I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms,
And happily repent. Farewell, farewell!
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
Why did I marry? This honest creature, doubtless,
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
My lord, I would I might entreat your honor
To scan this thing no farther; leave it to time.
Although 'tis fit that Cassio have his place --
For sure he fills it up with great ability -- 
Yet if you please to [hold] him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means. 
Note if your lady strain his entertainment 
With any strong or vehement importunity;
Much will be seen in that. In the mean time,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.
This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all [qualities], with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heart-strings,
I'ld whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
Into the vale of years (yet that's not much),
She's gone. I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage!
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad 
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon
For others' uses. Yet 'tis the plague [of] great ones, 
Prerogatived are they less than the base;
'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Look where she comes:
If she be false, [O then] heaven [mocks] itself!
I'll not believe't. How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.
I am to blame. Why do you speak so faintly?
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
[Faith], that's with watching, 'twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well. Your napkin is too little;
Let it alone. Come, I'll go in with you.
I am very sorry that you are not well. 
I am glad I have found this napkin;
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it; but she so loves the token
(For he conjured her she should ever keep it)
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,
And give't Iago. What he will do with it
I nothing but to please his fantasy.
Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.
O, is that all? What will you give me now
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona, 
That which so often you did bid me steal. 
No, [faith]; she let it drop by negligence,
And to th' advantage, I, being here, took't up.
Look, here 'tis. A good wench, give it me.
What will you do with't, that you have been so earnest
To have me filch it? Why, what is that to you?
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give't me again. Poor lady, she'll run mad
I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealious confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ; this may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons, 
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood 
Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.
Look where he comes! Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owedst yesterday. Ha, ha, false to me?
Why, how now, general? No more of that.
Avaunt, be gone! thou hast set me on the rack.
I swear 'tis better to be much abused
Than but to know't a little. How now, my lord?
What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust?
I saw't not, thought it not; it harmed not me.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n,
Let him not know't, and he's not robbed at all.
I had been happy, if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body, 
So I had nothing known. O now, for ever 
Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars
That makes ambition virtue! O, farewell!
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
Th' immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or by the worth of mine eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my waked wrath! Is't come to this?
Make me to see't; or (at the least) so prove it
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop 
To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!
If thou dost slander her and torture me, 
Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
On horror's head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that. O grace! O heaven forgive me!
Are you a man? Have you a soul? or sense?
God buy you; take mine office. O wretched fool,
That lov'st to make thine honesty a vice!
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offense.
I should be wise -- for honesty's a fool
And loses that it works for. By the world,
I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not.
I'll have some proof. [Her] name, that was as fresh 
As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives, 
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams, 
I'll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
I see, [sir], you are eaten up with passion;
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied? Would? nay, and I will.
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the [supervisor], grossly gape on?
Behold her topped? Death and damnation! O!
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect; damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own. What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances
Which lead directly to the door of truth 
Will give you satisfaction, you might have't.
Give me a living reason she's disloyal. 
But sith I am ent'red in this cause so far
(Pricked to't by foolish honesty and love),
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
There are a kind of men, so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs;
In sleep I heard him say, "Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves";
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand;
Cry, "O sweet creature!" then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
That grew upon my lips; [then] laid his leg
[Over] my thigh, and [sighed], and [kissed], and then
[Cried], "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"
O monstrous! monstrous! Nay, this was but his dream.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream,
And this may help to thicken other proofs 
Nay, yet be wise; yet we see nothing done;
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wive's hand?
I gave her such a one; 'twas my first gift.
I know not that; but such a handkerchief
(I am sure it was your wive's) did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with. If it be that --
If it be that, or any [that] was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
O that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught, 
For 'tis of aspics, tongues! Yet be content. 
Patience, I say; your mind [perhaps] may change.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Nev'r [feels] retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
Shall nev'r look back, nev'r ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. Now by yond marble heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow
I here engage my words. Do not rise yet. 
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about, 
Witness that here Iago doth give up 
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wronged Othello's service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever. I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to't:
Within these three days let me hear thee say
My friend is dead; 'tis done at your request.
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn her!
Come go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
I dare not say he lies any where. 
I will catechize the world for him, that is,
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I
have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope 
To do this is within the compass of man's wit,
and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Where should I lose the handkerchief, Emilia? 
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse 
Full of crusadoes; and but my noble Moor 
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness
As jealious creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking. Is he not jealious?
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be called to him. -- How is't with you, my lord?
Well, my good lady. O, hardness to dissemble! --
How do you, Desdemona? Well, my good lord.
Give me your hand. This hand-is moist, my lady.
It [yet] hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart;
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty: fasting and prayer, 
Much castigation, exercise devout,
For here's a young and sweating devil here 
That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand, 
A frank one. You may, indeed, say so;
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands;
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;
Lend me thy handkerchief. Here, my lord.
Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it, 
'Twould make her amiable, and subdue my father
Entirely to her love; but if she lost it, 
Or made a gift of it, my father's eye 
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on't,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose't or give't away were such perdition
As nothing else could match. Is't possible?
'Tis true; there's magic in the web of it.
A sibyl, that had numb'red in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sewed the work;
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful
Conserved of maidens' hearts. [I' faith]! is't true?
Most veritable, therefore look to't well.
Then would to [God] that I had never seen't!
Why do you speak so startingly and rash? 
Is't lost? Is't gone? Speak, is't out o' th' way? 
It is not lost; but what and if it were?
Why, so I can, [sir,] but I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you let Cassio be received again.
Fetch me the handkerchief, my mind misgives.
You'll never meet a more sufficient man.
The handkerchief! I pray talk me of Cassio.
The handkerchief!] A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shared dangers with you -- The handkerchief!
Sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief; 
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
There is no other way: 'tis she must do't;
And lo the happiness! Go, and importune her.
How now, good Cassio, what's the news with you?
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love
Whom I, with all the office of my heart,
Entirely honor. I would not be delayed.
If my offense be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purposed merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again, 
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forced content, 
And shut myself up in some other course, 
To fortune's alms. Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
My advocation is not now in tune.
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favor as in humor altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do, I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
Is my lord angry? He went hence but now;
And certainly in strange unquietness.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon
When it hath blown his ranks into the air,
And like the devil from his very arm
Puffed his own brother -- and is he angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There's matter in't indeed, if he be angry. 
I prithee do so. Something sure of state, 
Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice 
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so;
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was (unhandsome warrior as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find I had suborned the witness,
Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think,
And no conception nor no jealious toy
Alas the day, I never gave him cause.
But jealious souls will not be answered so;
They are not ever jealious for the cause,
But jealious for they're jealious. It is a monster 
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
Heaven keep the monster from Othello's mind! 
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout;
If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
'Save you, friend Cassio! What make you from home?
How is't with you, my most fair Bianca?
[I'faith], sweet love, I was coming to your house.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What? keep a week away? seven days and nights?
Eightscore eight hours? and lovers' absent hours,
More tedious than the dial eightscore times?
O weary reck'ning! Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, 
Take me this work out. O Cassio, whence came this? 
This is some token from a newer friend;
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is't come to this? Well, well. Go to, woman!
Throw your vild guesses in the devil's teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealious now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance;
No, [by my faith], Bianca. Why, whose is it?
I know not, neither; I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well; ere it be demanded
(As like enough it will) I would have it copied.
Take it, and do't, and leave me for this time.
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me womaned. Why, I pray you?
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here; but I'll see you soon.
'Tis very good; I must be circumstanced.
Will you think so? Think so, Iago? What,
To kiss in private? An unauthorized kiss!
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour, or more, not meaning any harm?
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil.
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
If they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip;
But if I give my wife a handkerchief --
Why then 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow't on any man.
She is protectress of her honor too;
Her honor is an essence that's not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou saidst (O, it comes o'er my memory, 
As doth the raven o'er the infectious house, 
Boding to all) he had my handkerchief.
Ay; what of that? That's not so good now. What
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say -- as knaves be such abroad,
Who having by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab -- Hath he said any thing?
He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
No more than he'll unswear. What hath he said?
[Faith], that he did -- I know not what he did.
Lie -- With her? With her? On her; what you will.
Confess? Handkerchief? O devil! Work on,
My medicine, [work]! Thus credulous fools are caught,
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus
[All guiltless] meet reproach. -- What ho! my lord!
My lord, I say! Othello! How now, Cassio?
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples. [No, forbear,]
The lethargy must have his quiet course;
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by 
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
Do you withdraw yourself a little while, 
He will recover straight. When he is gone, 
I would on great occasion speak with you.
Dost thou mock me? I mock you not, by heaven.
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
A horned man's a monster and a beast.
There's many a beast then in a populous city,
Did he confess it? Good sir, be a man;
Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
May draw with you. There's millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar; your case is better.
O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Confine yourself but in a patient list. 
Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief 
(A passion most [unsuiting] such a man),
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy;
Bade him anon return and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns
That dwell in every region of his face,
For I will make him tell the tale anew:
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife.
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Or I shall say y' are all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man. Dost thou hear, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But (dost thou hear) most bloody. That's not amiss,
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca, 
A huswife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and [clothes]. It is a creature 
That dotes on Cassio (as 'tis the strumpet's plague 
To beguile many and be beguiled by one);,
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
And his unbookish jealousy must [conster]
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behaviors
Quite in the wrong. How do you [now], lieutenant?
The worser that you give me the addition
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't.
Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's [pow'r],
How quickly should you speed! Alas, poor caitiff!
Alas, poor rogue, I think, [i' faith], she loves me.
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out. 
Do you hear, Cassio? Now he importunes him 
To tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said. 
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do [you] triumph, Roman? do you triumph?
[Faith], the cry goes that you marry her.
How now, my sweet Bianca? how now? how now? 
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief! 
[Faith,] I must, she'll rail in the streets else.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
O, a thousand, a thousand times. And then
Of so gentle a condition! Ay, too gentle.
Nay, that's certain. But yet the pity of it,
I will chop her into messes. Cuckold me! 
O, 'tis foul in her. With mine officer! 
Excellent good. What trumpet is that same?
I warrant, something from Venice. 'Tis Lodovico --
This comes from the Duke. See, your wife's with him.
[God] save you, worthy general! With all my heart, sir.
The Duke and the senators of Venice greet you. 
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures. 
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
I am very glad to see you, signior;
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?
Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
An unkind breach; but you shall make all well.
Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?
A most unhappy one. I would do much
T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
Fire and brimstone! My lord? Are you wise?
What, is he angry? May be th' letter moved him;
For as I think, they do command him home, 
Deputing Cassio in his government. 
[By my troth], I am glad on't. Indeed? My lord?
I am glad to see you mad. Why, sweet Othello?
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw't. 'Tis very much,
Make her amends; she weeps. O devil, devil!
If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight! I will not stay to offend you. 
I do beseech your lordship call her back.
Mistress! lord? What would you with her, sir? 
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn. 
Sir, she can turn, and turn; and yet go on 
And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
And she's obedient, as you say, obedient;
Very obedient. -- Proceed you in your tears. --
Concerning this, sir -- O well-painted passion! --
I am commanded home. -- Get you away;
I'll send for you anon. -- Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice. -- Hence, avaunt!
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight
I do entreat that we may sup together.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. -- Goats and monkeys!
Is this the noble Moor whom our full Senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce? He is much changed.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
He's that he is; I may not breathe my censure 
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were! What? strike his wife? 
Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst! Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood,
And new-create [this] fault? Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech. Do but go after,
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
Nor ever heard -- nor ever did suspect.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them. 
What? did they never whisper? Never, my lord. 
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest;
Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy; the purest of their wives
Is foul as slander. Bid her come hither; go. 
She says enough; yet she's a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtile whore,
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets;
And yet she'll kneel and pray; I have seen her do't.
What is your pleasure? Let me see your eyes; 
Look in my face. What horrible fancy's this?
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door;
Cough, or cry "hem," if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery; [nay], dispatch.
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
Why? what art thou? Your wife, my lord; your true 
And loyal wife. Come swear it, damn thyself,
Lest being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee; therefore be double damned:
Swear thou art honest. Heaven doth truly know it.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false? 
Ah, Desdemon! Away, away, away!
Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If happily you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
[Why,] I have lost him too. Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction, had they rained
All kind of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience; but, alas, to make me
The fixed figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow [unmoving] finger at!
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well;
But there, where I have garnered up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life;
The fountain from the which my current runs 
Or else dries up: to be discarded thence!
Or keep it as a cestern for foul toads 
To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there, 
Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin --
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
O ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed!
Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write "whore" upon? What committed?
Committed? O thou public commoner,
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth
And will not hear't. What committed?
[Impudent strumpet!] By heaven, you do me wrong.
Are not you a strumpet? No, as I am a Christian. 
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
What, not a whore? No, as I shall be saved.
O, heaven forgive us! I cry you mercy then.
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello. -- You, mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate of hell! You, you! ay, you!
We have done our course; there's money for your pains.
I pray you turn the key and keep our counsel. 
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord? 
Who is thy lord? He that is yours, sweet lady.
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia;
I cannot weep, nor answers have I none
But what should go by water. Prithee tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding-sheets -- remember;
And call thy husband hither. Here's a change indeed! 
'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
How have I been behaved, that he might stick
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?
What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you?
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so; for in good faith
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, 
Am I that name, Iago? What name, fair lady?
Such as she said my lord did say I was.
He called her whore. A beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
I do not know; I am sure I am none such.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Hath she forsook so many noble matches?
Her father? and her country? and her friends?
To be called whore? Would it not make one weep?
It is my wretched fortune. Beshrew him for't!
How comes this trick upon him? Nay, heaven doth know.
I will be hanged if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else.
Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
A halter pardon him! and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company? 
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave, 
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. 
O [heaven], that such companions thouedst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world
Even from the east to th' west! Speak within door.
O fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turned your wit the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
You are a fool; go to. Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him; for by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense
Delighted them [in] any other form;
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will [though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement] love him dearly, 
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much,
And his unkindness may defeat my life, 
But never taint my love. I cannot say "whore." 
It does abhor me now I speak the word;
To do the act that might the addition earn,
Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
I pray you be content; 'tis but his humor.
The business of the state does him offense,
If 'twere no other -- It is but so, I warrant.
Hark how these instruments summon to supper!
The messengers of Venice stays the meat.
Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.
I do not find that thou deal'st justly with me.
O, pardon me; 'twill do me good to walk.
Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.
Your honor is most welcome. Will you walk, sir?
He says he will return incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bid me to dismiss you. Dismiss me?
It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia, 
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns --
Prithee unpin me -- have grace and favor [in them].
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
All's one. Good [faith], how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before [thee], prithee shroud me
In one of these same sheets. Come, come; you talk.
My mother had a maid called Barbary;
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad,
And did forsake her. She had a song of "Willow,"
An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind; I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee dispatch.
This Lodovico is a proper man.
"Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve" --
Nay, that's not next. Hark, who is't that knocks?
So get thee gone, good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping? 'Tis neither here nor there.
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think -- tell me, Emilia --
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind? There be some such, no question.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
Why, would not you? No, by this heavenly light!
Nor I neither by this heavenly light;
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
The world's a huge thing; it is a great price
I do not think there is any such woman.
But I do think it is their husbands' faults
If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite:
Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know 
Their wives have sense like them; they see, and smell,
And have their palates both for sweet and sour, 
As husbands have. What is it that they do 
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is't frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well; else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Good night, good night. [God] me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend. 
Here, stand behind this [bulk], straight will he come. 
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick, fear nothing; I'll be at thy elbow.
It makes us, or it mars us, think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in't.
Here, at thy hand; be bold, and take thy stand. 
I have no great devotion to the deed,
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
'Tis but a man gone. Forth my sword; he dies.
I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life 
That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor
No, he must die. [Be't] so. I [hear] him coming. 
I know his gait, 'tis he. -- Villain, thou diest!
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou know'st.
I will make proof of thine. O, I am slain.
I am maimed for ever. Help ho! murther, murther! 
The voice of Cassio! Iago keeps his word.
O, villain that I am! It is even so.
'Tis he! -- O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come. 
[Forth] of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted; 
Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust's blood be spotted. 
What ho! no watch? no passage? Murther, murther!
'Tis some mischance, the voice is very direful.
These may be counterfeits; let's think't unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on murther?
We do not know. [Did] not you hear a cry? 
This is Othello's ancient, as I take it. 
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
What are you here that cry so grievously?
Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains!
O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away. O treacherous villains!
What are you there? Come in, and give some help.
That's one of them. O murd'rous slave! O villain!
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
Kill men i' th' dark? -- Where be these bloody thieves? --
How silent is this town! -- Ho, murther, murther! --
What may you be? Are you of good or evil? 
I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.
How is't, brother? My leg is cut in two.
Light, gentlemen! I'll bind it with my shirt.
What is the matter ho? Who is't that cried?
O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio!
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
Lend me a garter. So. -- O for a chair
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio! 
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury. -- 
Patience awhile, good Cassio. -- Come, come; 
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo! No -- yes, sure -- [O heaven,] Roderigo!
Even he, sir; did you know him? Know him? ay.
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon;
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners
That so neglected you. I am glad to see you.
How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!
He, he, 'tis he. O, that's well said: the chair.
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
I'll fetch the general's surgeon. For you, mistress,
Save you your labor. -- He that lies slain here, Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
None in the world; nor do I know the man. 
What? look you, pale? -- O, bear him [out] o' th' air. 
Stay you, good gentlemen. -- Look you pale, mistress? --
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye? --
Nay, [an'] you stare, we shall hear more anon. --
Behold her well; I pray you look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak,
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.
He's almost slain, and Roderigo quite dead.
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not. 
O, did he so? I charge you go with me.
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest 
Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dressed.
Come, mistress, you must tell's another tale.
Emilia, run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath happed. --
Will you go on afore? This is the night
That either makes me, or foredoes me quite. 
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul;
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars,
It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alablaster.
Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, 
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me; but once put out thy light, 
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature, 
I know not where is that promethean heat
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It needs must wither. I'll smell thee on the tree.
O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee
And love thee after. One more, and that's the last.
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow's heavenly,
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Who's there? Othello? Ay, Desdemona.
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon? Ay, my lord.
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, 
Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that? 
Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by. 
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit,
No, [heaven] forefend! I would not kill thy soul.
Talk you of killing? Ay, I do. Then heaven
Have mercy on me! Amen, with all my heart!
If you say [so], I hope you will not kill me.
And yet I fear you; for you're fatal then
That death's unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope, 
They do not point on me. Peace, and be still! 
That handkerchief which I so loved, and gave thee,
Thou gav'st to Cassio. No, by my life and soul!
Send for the man, and ask him. Sweet soul, take heed,
Take heed of perjury, thou art on thy death-bed.
Ay, but not yet to die. [Yes,] presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin;
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
[Then Lord] have mercy on me! I say, amen.
And have you mercy too! I never did
Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in's hand. 
O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart,
And [mak'st] me call what I intend to do 
A murther, which I thought a sacrifice. 
I saw the handkerchief. He found it then;
I never gave it him. Send for him hither;
Let him confess a truth. He hath confessed.
That he hath used thee. How? unlawfully? Ay. 
He will not say so. No -- his mouth is stopped;
Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.
O, my fear interprets. What, is he dead?
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Alas, he is betrayed and I undone!
Out, strumpet! weep'st thou for him to my face?
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight!
But half an hour! Being done, there is no pause.
But while I say one prayer! It is too late. 
O Lord, Lord, Lord!] My lord, my lord!
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead? 
I that am cruel am yet merciful, 
I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
So, so. What ho! my lord, my lord! Who's there?
O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
Yes. -- 'Tis Emilia. -- By and by. -- She's dead.
'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death;
The noise was high. Hah, no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were't good?
I think she stirs again. No. What's best to do?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife.
My wife, my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
O insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe
Did yawn at alteration. I do beseech you
That I may speak with you. O, good my lord!
I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia. -- 
Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw. --
Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now?
O, my good lord, yonder's foul murthers done!
It is the very, error of the moon,
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont,
Cassio, my lord, hath killed a young Venetian
Called Roderigo. Roderigo killed?
And Cassio killed? No, Cassio is not killed.
Not Cassio killed? Then murther's out of tune,
Out, and alas, that was my lady's voice. 
Help, help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona, O sweet mistress, speak! 
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell! 
Why, how should she be murd'red? Alas! who knows?
You [heard] her say herself, it was not I.
She said so; I must needs report the truth.
She's like a liar gone to burning hell:
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!
Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all. 
Ay, with Cassio. [Nay,] had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I'ld not have sold her for it. My husband?
Ay, 'twas he that told me on her first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds. My husband?
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!
My husband say she was false? He, woman:
I say thy husband; dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart.
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain. 
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven 
Than thou wast worthy her. Peace, you were best.
Thou hast not half that pow'r to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull, O dolt,
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed --
I care not for thy sword, I'll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help, help, ho, help!
The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murther, murther!
What is the matter? How now, general?
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
That men must lay their murthers on your neck.
Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man.
He says thou toldst him that his wife was false.
I know thou didst not; thou'rt not such a villain.
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.
But did you ever tell him she was false? 
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie; 
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie. 
She false with Cassio? did you say with Cassio?
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak.
My mistress here lies murthered in her bed --
And your reports have set the murder on.
Nay, stare not, masters, it is true indeed.
O monstrous act! Villainy, villainy, villainy!
I think upon't, I think -- I smell't -- O villainy!
I thought so then -- I'll kill myself for grief --
What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
'Tis proper I obey him; but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home. 
O, O, O! Nay, lay thee down and roar; 
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent 
That e'er did lift up eye. O, she was foul!
I scarce did know you, uncle; there lies your niece,
Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped.
I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father's dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
'Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand;
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
['Zounds], hold your peace. 'Twill out, 'twill out! I peace? 
No, I will speak as liberal as the north: 
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.
Be wise, and get you home. I will not. Fie,
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak'st of
I found by fortune, and did give my husband;
For often, with a solemn earnestness
(More than indeed belonged to such a trifle),
He begged of me to steal't. Villainous whore!
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
And I did give't my husband. Filth, thou liest!
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.
O murd'rous coxcomb, what should such a fool
But what serves for the thunder? -- Precious villain!
The woman falls; sure he hath killed his wife.
Ay, ay! O, lay me by my mistress' side.
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon
Which I have [here] recovered from the Moor.
Come guard the door without; let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
For 'tis a damned slave. I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honor outlive honesty?
Let it go all. What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
And die in music. "Willow, willow, willow."
Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true; 
So speaking as I think, alas, I die. 
I have another weapon in this chamber; 
It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper -- 
O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear:
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Look in upon me then and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.
What is the matter? Behold, I have a weapon;
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier's thigh. I have seen the day
That with this little arm, and this good sword,
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop. But (O vain boast!)
Who can control his fate? 'tis not so now.
Be not afraid though you do see me weaponed;
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismayed? 'Tis a lost fear;
Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go? 
Now -- how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench,
Pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt, 
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven, 
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
Even like thy chastity. O cursed, cursed slave!
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur!
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemon! dead, Desdemon! dead!
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
That's he that was Othello; here I am.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
I look down towards his feet; but that's a fable.
If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.
I am not sorry neither, I'ld have thee live; 
For in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.
O thou Othello, that was once so good, 
Fall'n in the practice of a [damned] slave, 
What shall be said to thee? Why, any thing:
An honorable murderer, if you will;
For nought I did in hate, but all in honor.
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
Demand me nothing; what you know, you know:
From this time forth I never will speak word.
What? not to pray? Torments will ope your lips.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, 
And here another. The one of them imports
The death of Cassio to be undertook 
O villain! Most heathenish and most gross!
Now here's another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this it seems
Roderigo meant t' have sent this damned villain;
But that, belike, Iago in the [nick]
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wive's? I found it in my chamber:
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire. O fool, fool, fool!
There is besides, in Roderigo's letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast; and even but now he spake
(After long seeming dead) Iago hurt him, 
You must forsake this room and go with us. 
Your power and your command is taken off, 
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.
Soft you; a word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they know't --
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely but too well;
Of one not easily jealious, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand
(Like the base [Indian]) threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinable gum. Set you down this; 
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk 
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state, 
I took by th' throat the circumcised dog,
O bloody period! All that is spoke is marred.
I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
For he was great of heart. O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
This is thy work. The object poisons sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. To you, Lord Governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain,
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it!
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state 
This heavy act with heavy heart relate. 
