<Per35VS><3.01>
The seas-tossed Pericles appears to speak. 
The god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell; and thou that hast
Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,
Thy deaf'ning, dreadful thunders, gently quench
How does my queen? -- [Thou] storm, venomously
Wilt thou spet all thyself? The seaman's whistle
Is as a whisper in the ears of death,
Unheard. -- Lychorida! -- Lucina, O!
Divinest patroness, and [midwife] gentle
To those that cry by night, convey thy Deity
Aboard our dancing boat, make swift the pangs
Of my queen's travails! -- Now, Lychorida!
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I
Am like to do. Take in your arms this piece
Of your dead queen. How? How, Lychorida? 
Patience, good sir, do not assist the storm.
Here's all that is left living of your queen: 
A little daughter. For the sake of it 
Be manly, and take comfort. O you gods!
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts
And snatch them straight away? We here below
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Use honor with you. Patience, good sir,
Even for this charge. Now, mild may be thy life!
For a more blusterous birth had never babe.
Quiet and gentle the conditions! for
Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world
That ever was prince's child. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding a nativity
As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make
To herald thee from the womb. Even at the first
Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit
With all thou canst find here. Now the good gods
Courage enough. I do not fear the flaw, 
It hath done to me the worst. Yet for the love 
Of this poor infant, this fresh new sea-farer,
Slack the bolins there! -- Thou wilt not, wilt
A terrible child-bed hast thou had, my dear,
No light, no fire. Th' unfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly, nor have I time
To give thee hallowed to thy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcely coffined, in [the ooze], 
Where, for a monument upon thy bones,
The [e'er-]remaining lamps, the belching whale 
And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse, 
Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and [paper],
My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffin. Lay the babe
Upon the pillow. Hie thee, whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her. Suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches,
I thank thee. Mariner, say, what coast is this?
We are near Tharsus. Thither, gentle mariner,
Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
O, make for Tharsus!}
There will I visit Cleon, for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus. There I'll leave it
At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner,
'T'as been a turbulent and stormy night.
I have been in many; but such a night as this
Your master will be dead ere you return,
There's nothing can be minist'red to nature
Good morrow to your lordship. Gentlemen, 
Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea, 
The very principals did seem to rend,
And all to topple. Pure surprise and fear
That is the cause we trouble you so early,
'Tis not our husbandry.  O, you say well.
But I much marvel that your lordship,  having
Rich tire about you, should at these early hours
Shake off the golden slumber of repose.
Nature should be so conversant with pain,
Being thereto not compelled.  I hold it ever
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater
Than nobleness and riches. Careless heirs
May the two latter darken and expend;
But immortality attends the former,
Making a man a god. 'Tis known, I ever 
Have studied physic; through which secret art,
By turning o'er authorities, I have, 
Together with my practice, made familiar 
To me and to my aid the blest infusions
That dwells in vegetives, in metals, stones;
And can speak of the disturbances
A more content in course of true delight
Than to be thirsty after tottering honor,
Or tie my pleasure up in silken bags,
Your honor has through Ephesus poured forth
Your charity, and hundreds call themselves
Your creatures, who by you have been restored;
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even
Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown as time shall never --
So, lift there.  What's that?  Sir, even now 
Did the sea toss up upon our shore this chest.
'Tis of some wrack.  Set't down, let's look upon't. 
'Tis like a coffin, sir.  What e'er it be,
'Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight.
If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold,
'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
'Tis so, my lord.  How close 'tis caulked and [bitumed]!
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,
As tossed it upon shore.  Wrench it open.
Soft! It smells most sweetly in my sense.
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.
O you most potent gods! what's here? a corse?
Shrouded in cloth of state, balmed and entreasured
With full bags of spices! A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in the characters!
If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart
That ever cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.  Nay, certainly tonight,
For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough
That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within.
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
Death may usurp on nature many hours,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
That had nine hours lien dead,}
Who was by good appliance recovered.
Well said, well said. The fire and cloths. 
The rough and woeful music that we have,
Cause it to sound, beseech you. 
The [vial] once more. How thou stir'st, thou block! 
The music there! I pray you give her air.
Gentlemen, this queen will live. Nature awakes,
A warmth [breathes] out of her. She hath not been
Entranced above five hours. See how she gins
To blow into life's flower again!  The heavens,
Through you, increase our wonder, and sets up
Your fame for ever.  She is alive; behold
Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels
Which Pericles hath lost, begin to part
Their fringes of bright gold. The diamonds
Of a most praised water doth appear,
To make the world twice rich. Live, and make
Us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,
Rare as you seem to be.   O dear Diana,
Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Lend me your hands. To the next chamber bear her. 
Get linen. Now this-matter must be looked to,
Most honored Cleon, I must needs be gone.
My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You and your lady
Take from my heart all thankfulness! The gods
That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither 
The powers above us. Could I rage and roar 
As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end
Must be as 'tis. My gentle babe Marina, whom,
For she was born at sea, I have named so, here
I charge your charity withal; leaving her
The infant of your care, beseeching you 
To give her princely training, that she may be
Your Grace, that fed my country with your corn,
For which the people's prayers still fall upon you,
Must in your child be thought on. If neglection
Should therein make me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, would force me to my duty;
But if to that my nature need a spur,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine
To the end of generation!  I believe you,
Your honor and your goodness teach me to't
Without your vows. Till she be married, madam,
By bright Diana, whom we honor, all
[Unscissored] shall this hair of mine remain,
Though I show [ill] in't. So I take my leave.
Good madam, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my child.  I have one myself,
Who shall not be more dear to my respect
Than yours, my lord.  Madam, my thanks and prayers. 
We'll bring your Grace e'en to the edge a' th' shore, 
Then give you up to the masked Neptune and 
The gentlest winds of heaven.  I will embrace
Your offer. Come, dearest madam. O, no tears,
Look to your little mistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord. 
Madam, this letter and some certain jewels
Lay with you in your coffer, which are
At your command. Know you the character?
That I was shipped at sea I well remember,
Even on my [eaning] time, but whether there
I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,
A vestal livery will I take me to,
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak, 
Diana's temple is not distant far,
Where you may abide till your date expire. 
Moreover if you please a niece of mine 
My recompense is thanks, that's all,}
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
<4.01>Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire.
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus,
Unto Diana there's a votaress.
Thy oath remember, thou hast sworn to do't.
'Tis but a blow, which never shall be known.
Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience, 
Which is but cold in flaming, thy [lone] bosom
In flame too nicely, nor let pity, which 
Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be 
I will do't, but yet she is a goodly creature.
The fitter then the gods should have her.
To strow thy green with flowers. The yellows, blues,
The purple violets, and marigolds,
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave
While summer days doth last. Ay me! poor maid,
Born in a tempest when my mother died,
How now, Marina, why do you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you? Do not
Consume your blood with sorrowing; have you
A nurse of me. Lord, how your favor's changed
With this unprofitable woe! Come 
Give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.
Walk with Leonine, the air is quick there, 
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach. Come, 
Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.
I'll not bereave you of your servant.  Come, 
I love the King your father, and yourself,
With more than foreign heart. We every day
Expect him here: when he shall come and find
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage,
Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken
No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerful once again, reserve
That excellent complexion, which did steal
The eyes of young and old. Care not for me,
I can go home alone.  Well, I will go,
Never was waves nor wind more violent,
And from the ladder-tackle washes off
A canvas-climber. "Ha!" says one, "wolt out?"
And with a dropping industry they skip
From [stem] to stern. The boatswain whistles, and
The master calls, and trebles their confusion. 
If you require a little space for prayer, 
I grant it. Pray, but be not tedious, for
The gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn
I never did her hurt in all my life.
I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn
To any living creature. Believe me law,
I never killed a mouse, nor hurt a fly;
I trod upon a worm against my will,
But I wept for't. How have I offended,
Wherein my death might yield her any profit,
Is not to reason of the deed, but do't.
You will not do't for all the world, I hope.
You are well-favored, and your looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately 
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought;
Good sooth, it showed well in you. Do so now. 
Your lady seeks my life, come you between, 
And save poor me, the weaker.  I am sworn,
And will dispatch. Hold, villain!  A prize, a prize!
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate  Valdes,
And they have seized Marina. Let her go!
There's no hope she will return. I'll swear she's dead,
And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further:
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. If she remain,
Whom they have ravished must by me be slain. 
Why [are] you foolish? Can it be undone?
O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughter
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,
I'd give it to undo the deed. O lady,
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crown a' th' earth
If thou hadst drunk to him, 't 'ad been a kindness
Becoming well thy [fact]. What canst thou say
When noble Pericles shall demand his child? 
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,
To foster it, not ever to preserve. 
She died at night; I'll say so. Who can cross it? 
Unless you play the [pious] innocent,
And for an honest attribute cry out,
"She died by foul play."  O, go to. Well, well,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods
Do like this worst.  Be one of those that thinks
The petty wrens of Tharsus will fly hence
And open this to Pericles. I do shame
To think of what a noble strain you are,
And of how coward a spirit.  To such proceeding
Who ever but his approbation added,
Though not his [prime] consent, he did not flow
From honorable courses.  Be it so then,
Yet none does know but you how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.
She did [distain] my child, and stood between
Her and her fortunes. None would look on her, 
But cast their gazes on Marina's face;
Whilest ours was blurted at and held a mawkin 
Not worth the time of day. It pierced me thorough, 
And though you call my course unnatural,
You not your child well loving, yet I find
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness
Performed to your sole daughter.  Heavens forgive it!
What should he say? We wept after her hearse,
Is almost finished, and her epitaphs
In glitt'ring golden characters express
A general praise to her, and care in us
At whose expense 'tis done.  Thou art like the harpy,
Which to betray, dost with thine angel's face
Y' are like one that superstitiously}
Do swear to th' gods that winter kills the flies,
But yet I know you'll do as I advise. 
Thus time we waste, and long leagues make short;
Sail seas in cockles, have and wish but for't,
From bourn to bourn, region to region.
By you being pardoned, we commit no crime
To use one language in each several clime
Where our scenes seems to live. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who stand [i' th'] gaps to teach you,
The stages of our story. Pericles
Is now again thwarting [the] wayward seas,
Attended on by many a lord and knight,
To see his daughter, all his live's delight.
Old Helicanus goes along. Behind
Is left to govern it, you bear in mind,
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time to great and high estate.
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought
This king to Tharsus -- think [his] pilot thought,
So with his steerage shall your thoughts [grow on] --
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone. 
Like motes and shadows see them move a while,
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile. 
See how belief may suffer by foul show!
This borrowed passion stands for true old woe;
And Pericles, in sorrow all devoured,
With sighs shot through and biggest tears  o'ershow'red,
Leaves Tharsus and again embarks. He swears
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs;
He [puts] on sackcloth, and to sea. He bears
A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,
And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit
The epitaph is for Marina writ
Marina was she called, and at her birth,
Thetis, being proud, swallowed some part a' th' earth.
Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflowed,
Hath Thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestowed;
Wherefore she does, and swears she'll never stint,
Make raging battery upon shores of flint."
No visor does become black villainy
So well as soft and tender flattery.
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered
By Lady Fortune, while our [scene] must play
His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-day
In her unholy service. Patience then, 
And think you now are all in Metelin. 
I am glad to see your honor in good health.
If she'd do the deeds of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Your honor knows what 'tis to say well enough.
If you were born to honor, show it now;
If put upon you, make the judgment good 
How's this? how's this? Some more, be sage.  For me,
That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune
Have placed me in this sty, where since I came,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic --
Would set me free from this unhallowed place,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
That flies i' th' purer air!  I did not think
Thou couldst have spoke so well, ne'er dreamt thou  couldst.
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
That I came with no ill intent, for to me
The very doors and windows savor vilely. 
Fare thee well, thou art a piece of virtue, and
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble. 
A curse upon him, die he like a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
I beseech your honor one piece for me.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!}
Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,
Since they do better thee in their command.
Thou hold'st a place for which the pained'st fiend
Of hell would not in reputation change.
Thou art the damned door-keeper to every
Custrel that comes inquiring for his Tib.
To the choleric fisting of every rogue
Thy ear is liable; thy food is such
As hath been belched on by infected lungs.
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty 
Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth,
Serve by indenture to the common hangman: 
Any of these ways are yet better than this; 
For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear. That the gods
Would safely deliver me from this place!
Here, here's gold for thee.
Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues, which I'll keep from boast,
And will undertake all these to teach.
I doubt not but this populous city will
But can you teach all this you speak of?
Prove that I cannot, take me home again
And prostitute me to the basest groom
Well, I will see what I can do for thee. 
I'll do for thee what I can; come your ways. 
<5.01>Marina thus the brothel scapes, and chances
Into an honest house, our story says.
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
As goddess-like to her admired lays.
Deep clerks she dumbs, and with her neele composes
Nature's own shape of bud, bird, branch, or berry,
That even her art sisters the natural roses;}
Her inkle, silk, [twin] with the rubied cherry,
That pupils lacks she none of noble race,
Who pour their bounty on her; and her gain
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place,
And to her father turn our thoughts again,
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him [lost],
Where, driven before the winds, he is arrived 
Here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast
Suppose him now at anchor. The city strived 
God Neptune's annual feast to keep, from whence 
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies,
His banners sable, trimmed with rich expense,
And to him in his barge with fervor hies.
In your supposing once more put your sight:
Of heavy Pericles think this his bark;
Where what is done in action, more, if might,
Shall be discovered, please you sit and hark. 
Where is Lord Helicanus? He can resolve you.
Sir, there is a barge put off from Meteline,
And in it is Lysirnachus the governor,
Who craves to come aboard. What is your will? 
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
Being on shore, honoring of Neptune's triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
I made to it to know of whence you are.
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Sir, Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the King, 
A man who for this three months hath not spoken
To any one, nor taken sustenance
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
Behold him. This was a goodly person,
Till the disaster that, one mortal [night,]
It is in vain, he will not speak to you. Sir, 
We have a maid in Meteline, I durst wager,
Would win some words of him. 'Tis well bethought. 
She questionless with her sweet harmony,
And other chosen attractions, would allure
And make a batt'ry through his [deafened] parts,
She is all happy as the fairest of all,}
And [with] her fellow maids, [is] now upon
The leavy shelter that abuts against
Sure all effectless; yet nothing we'll omit
That bears recovery's name. But since your kindness
We have stretched thus far, let us beseech you
That for our gold we may provision have,
Wherein we are not destitute for want,
But weary for the staleness. O sir, a courtesy
Which if we should deny, the most just God
For every graff would send a caterpillar
And so inflict our province. Yet once more
Let me entreat to know at large the cause 
Of your Kings sorrow. But see, I am prevented. 
The lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!
She's such a one that were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,
Fair [one], all goodness that consists in beauty,
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient,
If that thy prosperous and artificial [feat]}
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay
As thy desires can wish. Sir, I will use
My utmost skill in his recovery, provided
That none but I and my companion maid
Be suffered to come near him. Come, let us
Leave her, And the gods make her prosperous!
[Marked] he your music? No, nor looked on us.
My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes,
But have been gazed on like a comet. She speaks,
My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief
Might equal yours, if both were justly weighed.
Though wayward fortune did malign my state,
My derivation was from ancestors
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings
But time hath rooted out my parentage,
And to the world and awkward casualties
Bound me in servitude. I will desist,
But there is something glows upon my cheek, And 
Whispers in mine ear, "Go not till he speak."
My fortunes -- parentage -- good parentage --
To equal mine -- was it not thus? What say 
You? I said, my lord, if you did know my 
parentage, You would not do me violence. 
I do think so. Pray you turn your eyes upon me.
You're like something that -- What country [-woman]?
Here of these [shores]? No, nor of any [shores],
Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.
My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one
My daughter might have been. My queen's square brows,
Her stature to an inch, as wand-like straight,
As silver-voiced, her eyes as jewel-like
And [cased] as richly, in pace another Juno;
Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry,
The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?
Where I am but a stranger. From the deck
You may discern the place. Where were you bred?
And how achieved you these endowments which 
{You make more rich to owe?}
If I should tell my history, it would seem 
Like lies disdained in the reporting. 
Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou lookest
Modest as Justice, and thou seemest a [palace]
For the crowned Truth to dwell in. I will believe thee,
And make [my] senses credit thy relation
To points that seem impossible, for thou lookest
Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?
Didst thou not [say], when I did push thee back --}
Which was when I perceived thee -- that thou cam'st
From good descending? So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage. I think thou saidst
Thou hadst been tossed from wrong to injury,
And that thou thoughts' thy griefs might equal mine,
I said, and said no more but what my thoughts
Did warrant me was likely. Tell thy story;
If thine, considered, prove the thousand part 
Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I
Have suffered like a girl. Yet thou dost look 
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling 
Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?
How lost thou [them?] Thy name, my most kind virgin?
Recount, I do beseech thee. Come sit by me.
My name is Marina. O, I am mocked,
And thou by some incensed god sent hither
To make the world to laugh at me. Patience, good sir!
Or here I'll cease. Nay, I'll be patient.
Thou little know thou't dost startle me
The name Was given me by one that had some power,
How, a king's daughter? And called Marina?
But not to be a troubler of your peace, 
I will end here. But are you flesh and blood? 
Have you a working pulse, and are no fairy? 
Motion? Well, speak on. Where were you born?
Called Marina, for I was born at sea.
My mother was the daughter of a king,
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft
Delivered weeping. O, stop there a little!
This is the rarest dream that e'er dulled sleep
Did mock sad fools withal. This cannot be
My daughter -- buried! -- Well, where were you bred?
I'll hear you more, to th' bottom of your story,
You scorn. Believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
I will believe you by the syllable
Of what you shall deliver. Yet give me leave:
How came you in these parts? Where were you bred? 
The King my father did in Tharsus leave me, 
Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife, 
Did seek to murther me; and having wooed
A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't,
A crew of pirates came and rescued me;
Brought me to Meteline. But, good sir,
Whither will you have me? Why do you weep?
You think me an imposture. No, good faith;
I am the daughter to King Pericles,
If good King Pericles be. Ho, Helicanus!
Thou art a grave and noble counsellor,
Most wise in general, tell me if thou canst,
What this maid is, or what is like to be,
That thus hath made me weep. I know not, but
Here's the regent, sir, of Meteline
Speaks nobly of her. She never would tell
Her parentage; being demanded that, 
O Helicanus, strike me, honored sir, 
Give me a gash, put me to present pain, 
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me
O'erbear the shores of my mortality,
And drown me with their sweetness. O, come hither,
Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget;
Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tharsus,
And found at sea again! O Helicanus,
Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud 
As thunder threatens us. This is Marina.
What was thy mother's name? Tell me but that, 
For truth can never be confirmed enough, 
Though doubts did ever sleep. First, sir, I pray,
I am Pericles of Tyre; but tell me now
My drowned queen's name, as in the rest you said
The heir of kingdoms, and another [life]
Is it no more to be your daughter than
To say my mother's name was Thaisa?
Thaisa was my mother, who did end
Now blessing on thee! rise, th' art my child.
Give me fresh garments. Mine own Helicanus, been
She is not dead at Tharsus as she should have been
By savage Cleon. She shall tell thee all
When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge
She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Sir, 'tis the governor of Meteline,
Who, hearing of your melancholy state, 
Give me my robes. I am wild in my beholding. 
O heavens bless my girl! But hark, what music?
Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him
O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to dote,
How sure you are my daughter. But what music?
The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.
It is not good to cross him, give him way.
Music, my lord? I hear. Most heavenly music!
It nips me unto list'ning, and thick slumber
So leave him all. Well, my companion friends,
If this but answer to my just belief,
My temple stands in Ephesus, hie thee thither,
And do upon mine altar sacrifice. 
There, when my maiden priests are met together 
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife.
To mourn thy crosses, with they daughter's, call
And give them repetition to the [life].
Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe;
Do't, and happy, by my silver bow!
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,
I will obey thee. Helicanus! Sir?
My purpose was for Tharsus, there to strike
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am
For other service first. Toward Ephesus
Turn our blown sails; eftsoons I'll tell thee why.
Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,
And give you gold for such provision
With all my heart, and, when you come ashore,
I have another [suit]. You shall prevail, 
Were it to woo my daughter, for it seems
Sir, lend me your arm. Come, my Marina. 
Hail, Dian! to perform thy just command,
I here confess myself the King of Tyre,
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.
At sea in child-bed died she, but brought forth
A maid-child called Marina, whom, O goddess, 
Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tharsus
Was nursed with Cleon, who at fourteen years 
He sought to murder, but her better stars 
Brought her to Meteline, 'gainst whose shore
Riding, her fortunes brought the maid aboard us,
Where, by her own most clear remembrance, she
Made known herself my daughter. Voice and favor!
You are, you are -- O royal Pericles! 
What means the [nun]? She dies, help, gentlemen!
If you have told Diana's altar true,
This is your wife. Reverent appearer, no,
I threw her overboard with these very arms.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.'Tis most certain.
Look to the lady; O, she's but overjoyed.
Early in blustering morn this lady was
Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,
Found there rich jewels, recovered her, and placed her
Here in Diana's temple. May we see them?
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house, 
Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is 
Recovered. O, let me look!
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,
But curb it, spite of seeing. O my lord,
Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,
Like him you are! did you not name a tempest,
A birth, and death? The voice of dead Thaisa!
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead And drowned.
Immortal Dian! Now I know you better.
When we with tears parted Pentapolis,
The King my father gave you such a ring.
This, this. No more, you gods! your present kindness
Makes my past miseries sports. You shall do well 
That on the touching of her lips I may
Melt, and no more be seen. O, come, be buried 
A second time within these arms. My heart
Leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
Look who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh,Thaisa,
Thy burden at the sea, and called Marina
For she was yielded there. Blest, and mine own!
Hail, madam, and my queen!I know you not.
You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre,
I left behind an ancient substitute.
Can you remember what I called the man?
I have named him oft.'Twas Helicanus then.
Embrace him, dear Thaisa, this is he.
Now do I long to hear how you were found,
How possibly preserved, and who to thank 
(Besides the gods) for this great miracle.
Through whom the gods have shown their power; that can
From first to last resolve you. Reverent sir,
The gods can have no mortal officer
More like a god than you. Will you deliver
How this dead queen relives? I will, my lord.
Beseech you first, go with me to my house,
Where shall be shown you all was found with her;
How she came placed here in the temple;
No needful thine omitted. Pure Dian,
[I] bless thee for thy vision, and will offer
Night-oblations to thee. Thaisa,
This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter,
Shall marry her at Pentapolis. And now
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form,
And what this fourteen years no razor touched,
To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify. 
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,
We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves
Will in that kingdom spend our following days.
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.
Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay
To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead's the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward.
In Pericles, his queen and daughter, seen,
Although assailed with fortune fierce and keen,
Virtue [preserved] from fell destruction's blast,
Led on by heaven, and crowned with joy at last.
In Helicanus may you well descry
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty.
In reverend Cerimon there well appears
The worth that learned charity aye wears. 
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame
Had spread his cursed deed, the honored name 
Of Pericles to rage the city turn, 
That him and his they in his palace burn;
The gods for murder seemed so content
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So, on your patience evermore attending,
New joy wait on you! Here our play has ending.


