Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, 
Coz'ning the pillow of a lawful kiss; 
Who therefore angry seems to part in sunder, 
Swelling on either side to want his bliss; 
Between whose hills her head entombed is; 
 Where like a virtuous monument she lies, 
 To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes. 
 
Without the bed her other fair hand was, 
On the green coverlet, whose perfect white 
Showed like an April daisy on the grass, 
With pearly sweat resembling dew of night. 
Her eyes like marigolds had sheathed their light, 
 And canopied in darkness sweetly lay, 
 Till they might open to adorn the day. 
 
Her hair like golden threads played with her breath -- 
O modest wantons, wanton modesty! -- 
Showing life's triumph in the map of death, 
And death's dim look in life's mortality. 
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify, 
 As if between them twain there were no strife, 
 But that life lived in death, and death in life. 
 
Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue, 
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered, 
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew, 
And him by oath they truly honored. 
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred, 
 Who like a foul usurper went about 
 From this fair throne to heave the owner out. 
 
What could he see but mightily he noted? 
What did he note but strongly he desired? 
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted, 
And in his will his willful eye he tired. 
With more than admiration he admired 
 Her azure veins, her alablaster skin, 
 Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin. 
 
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey, 
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied, 
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay, 
His rage of lust by gazing qualified; 
Slaked, not suppressed, for standing by her side, 
 His eye, which late this mutiny restrains, 
 Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins. 
 
And they like straggling slaves for pillage fighting, 
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting, 
In bloody death and ravishment delighting, 
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting, 
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting. 
 Anon his beating heart, alarum striking, 
 Gives the hot charge, and bids them do their liking. 
 
His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye, 
His eye commends the leading to his hand; 
His hand as proud of such a dignity, 
Smoking with pride, marched on, to make his stand 
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land; 
 Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale, 
 Left their round turrets destitute and pale. 
 
They must'ring to the quiet cabinet 
Where their dear governess and lady lies, 
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset, 
And fright her with confusion of their cries. 
She much amazed breaks ope her locked-up eyes, 
 Who peeping forth this tumult to behold, 
 Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled. 
 
Imagine her as one in dead of night 
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking, 
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite, 
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking; 
What terror 'tis! but she in worser taking, 
 From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view 
 The sight which makes supposed terror true. 
 
Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears, 
Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies; 
She dares not look, yet winking there appears 
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes. 
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries, 
 Who angry that the eyes fly from their lights, 
 In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights. 
 
His hand that yet remains upon her breast 
(Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!) 
May feel her heart (poor citizen!) distressed, 
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall, 
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal. 
 This moves in him more rage and lesser pity 
 To make the breach and enter this sweet city. 
 
First like a trumpet doth his tongue begin 
To sound a parley to his heartless foe, 
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin, 
The reason of this rash alarm to know, 
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show; 
 But she with vehement prayers urgeth still 
 Under what color he commits this ill. 
 
Thus he replies: "The color in thy face, 
That even for anger makes the lily pale, 
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace, 
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale. 
Under that color am I come to scale 
 Thy never-conquered fort; the fault is thine, 
 For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine. 
 
"Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide, 
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night, 
Where thou with patience must my will abide -- 
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight, 
Which I to conquer sought with all my might; 
 But as reproof and reason beat it dead, 
 By thy bright beauty was it newly bred. 
 
"I see what crosses my attempt will bring, 
I know what thorns the growing rose defends, 
l think the honey guarded with a sting: 
All this beforehand counsel comprehends. 
But Will is deaf and hears no heedful friends; 
 Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty, 
 And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty. 
 
"I have debated, even in my soul, 
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed, 
But nothing can affection's course control, 
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed. 
l know repentant tear ensue the deed, 
 Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity, 
 Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy." 
 
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade, 
Which like a falcon tow'ring in the skies, 
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade, 
Whose crooked beak threats, if he mount, he dies: 
So under his insulting falchion lies 
 Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells 
 With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcons' bells. 
 
"Lucrece," quoth he, "this night I must enjoy thee 
If thou deny, then force must work my way, 
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee. 
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay, 
To kill thine honor with thy live's decay; 
 And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him, 
 Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him. 
 
"So thy surviving husband shall remain 
The scornful mark of every open eye; 
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain, 
Thy issue blurred with nameless bastardy; 
And thou, the author of their obloquy, 
 Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes, 
 And sung by children in succeeding times. 
 
"But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend: 
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted. 
A little harm done to a great good end 
For lawful policy remains enacted. 
The poisonous simple sometime is compacted 
 In a pure compound; being so applied, 
 His venom in effect is purified. 
 
"Then for thy husband and thy children's sake, 
Tender my suit; bequeath not to their lot 
The shame that from them no device can take, 
The blemish that will never be forgot, 
Worse than a slavish wipe, or birth-hour's blot; 
 For marks descried in men's nativity 
 Are nature's faults, not their own infamy." 
 
Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye 
He rouseth up himself, and makes a pause; 
While she, the picture of pure piety, 
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws, 
Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws, 
 To the rough beast that knows no gentle right, 
 Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite. 
 
But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat, 
In his dim mist th' aspiring mountains hiding, 
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get, 
Which blow these pitchy vapors from their biding, 
Hind'ring their present fall by this dividing; 
 So his unhallowed haste her words delays, 
 And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays. 
 
Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally, 
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth. 
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly, 
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth. 
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth 
 No penetrable entrance to her plaining: 
 Tears harden lust, though marble [wear] with raining. 
 
Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fixed 
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face; 
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mixed, 
Which to her oratory adds more grace. 
She puts the period often from his place, 
 And midst the sentence so her accent breaks, 
 That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks. 
 
She conjures him by high almighty Jove, 
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath, 
By her untimely tears, her husband's love, 
By holy human law, and common troth, 
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both, 
 That to his borrowed bed he make retire, 
 And stoop to honor, not to foul desire. 
 
Quoth she, "Reward not hospitality 
With such black payment as thou hast pretended; 
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee, 
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended. 
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended; 
 He is no woodman that doth bend his bow 
 To strike a poor unseasonable doe. 
 
"My husband is thy friend, for his sake spare me; 
Thyself art mighty, for thine own sake leave me; 
Myself a weakling, do not then ensnare me; 
Thou look'st not like deceit, do not deceive me. 
My sighs like whirlwinds labor hence to heave thee. 
 If ever man were moved with woman's moans, 
 Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans. 
 
"All which together, like a troubled ocean, 
Beat at thy rocky and wrack-threat'ning heart, 
To soften it with their continual motion; 
For stones dissolved to water do convert. 
O, if no harder than a stone thou art, 
 Melt at my tears and be compassionate! 
 Soft pity enters at an iron gate. 
 
"In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee; 
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame? 
To all the host of heaven I complain me: 
Thou wrong'st his honor, wound'st his princely name. 
Thou art not what thou seem'st, and if the same, 
 Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king; 
 For kings like gods should govern every thing. 
 
"How will thy shame be seeded in thine age 
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring? 
If in thy hope thou dar'st do such outrage, 
What dar'st thou not when once thou art a king? 
O, be rememb'red, no outrageous thing 
 From vassal actors can be wiped away; 
 Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay. 
 
"This deed will make thee only loved for fear, 
But happy monarchs still are feared for love; 
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear, 
When they in thee the like offenses prove. 
If but for fear of this, thy will remove; 
 For princes are the glass, the school, the book, 
 Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look. 
 
"And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn? 
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame? 
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern 
Authority for sin, warrant for blame, 
To privilege dishonor in thy name? 
 Thou back'st reproach against long-living laud, 
 And mak'st fair reputation but a bawd. 
 
"Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee, 
From a pure heart command thy rebel will; 
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity, 
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill. 
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill, 
 When patterned by thy fault foul Sin may say 
 He learned to sin, and thou didst teach the way? 
 
"Think but how vile a spectacle it were 
To view thy present trespass in another. 
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear, 
Their own transgressions partially they smother: 
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother. 
 O how are they wrapped in with infamies 
 That from their own misdeeds askaunce their eyes! 
 
"To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal, 
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier. 
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal, 
Let him return, and flatt'ring thoughts retire; 
His true respect will prison false desire, 
 And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne, 
 That thou shalt see thy state, and pity mine." 
 
"Have done," quoth he, "my uncontrolled tide 
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let. 
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide, 
And with the wind in greater fury fret. 
The petty streams that pay a daily debt 
 To their-salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste 
 Add to his flow, but alter not his taste. 
 
"Thou art," quoth she, "a sea, a sovereign king,
And lo there falls into thy boundless flood 
Black lust, dishonor, shame, misgoverning, 
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood. 
If all these petty ills shall change thy good, 
 Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed, 
 And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed. 
 
"So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave; 
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified; 
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave; 
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride. 
The lesser thing should not the greater hide: 
 The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot, 
 But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root. 
 
"So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state" -- 
"No more," quoth he, "by heaven, I will not hear thee. 
Yield to my love, if not, enforced hate, 
In stead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee; 
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee 
 Unto the base bed of some rascal groom, 
 To be thy partner in this shameful doom." 
 
This said, he sets his foot upon the light, 
For light and lust are deadly enemies; 
Shame folded up in blind concealing night, 
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize. 
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries, 
 Till with her own white fleece her voice controlled 
 Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold. 
 
For with the nightly linen that she wears 
He pens her piteous clamors in her head, 
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears 
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed. 
O that prone lust should stain so pure a bed! 
 The spots where of could weeping purify, 
 Her tears should drop on them perpetually. 
 
But she hath lost dearer thing than life, 
And he hath won what he would lose again; 
This forced league doth force a further strife, 
This momentary joy breeds months of pain, 
This hot desire converts to cold disdain; 
 Pure Chastity is rifled of her store, 
 And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before. 
 
Look as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk, 
Unapt for tender smell, or speedy flight, 
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk 
The prey wherein by nature they delight, 
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night: 
 His taste delicious, in digestion souring, 
 Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring. 
 
O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit 
Can comprehend in still imagination! 
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt 
Ere he can see his own abomination. 
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation 
 Can curb his heat, or rein his rash desire, 
 Till like a jade, Self-will himself doth tire. 
 
And then with lank and lean discolored cheek, 
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace, 
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek, 
Like to a bankrout beggar wails his case: 
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace, 
 For there it revels, and when that decays, 
 The guilty rebel for remission prays. 
 
So fares it with this fault-full lord of Rome, 
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased, 
For now against himself he sounds this doom, 
That through the length of times he stands disgraced; 
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced, 
 To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares, 
 To ask the spotted princess how she fares. 
 
She says her subjects with foul insurrection 
Have battered down her consecrated wall, 
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection 
Her immortality, and made her thrall 
To living death and pain perpetual; 
 Which in her prescience she controlled still, 
 But her foresight could not forestall their will. 
 
Ev'n in this thought through the dark night he stealeth, 
A captive victor that hath lost in gain, 
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth, 
The scar that will despite of cure remain, 
Leaving his spoil perplexed in greater pain. 
 She bears the load of lust he left behind, 
 And he the burthen of a guilty mind. 
 
He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence, 
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there; 
He scowls and hates himself for his offense, 
She desperate with her nails her flesh doth tear; 
He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear; 
 She stays, exclaiming on the direful night, 
 He runs, and chides his vanished loathed delight. 
 
He thence departs a heavy convertite, 
She there remains a hopeless castaway; 
He in his speed looks for the morning light, 
She prays she never may behold the day: 
"For day," quoth she, "night's scapes doth open lay, 
 And my true eyes have never practiced how 
 To cloak offenses with a cunning brow. 
 
"They think not but that every eye can see 
The same disgrace which they themselves behold; 
And therefore would they still in darkness be, 
To have their unseen sin remain untold; 
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
 And grave, like water that doth eat in steel, 
 Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel." 
 
Here she exclaims against repose and rest, 
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind; 
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast, 
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find 
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind. 
 Frantic with grief thus breathes. she forth her spite 
 Against the unseen secrecy of night: 
 
"O comfort-killing Night, image of hell, 
Dim register and notary of shame, 
Black stage for tragedies and murthers fell, 
Vast sin-concealing chaos, nurse of blame! 
Blind muffled bawd, dark harbor for defame, 
 Grim cave of death, whisp'ring conspirator 
 With close-tongued treason and the ravisher! 
