"Look, look how list'ning Priam wets his eyes, 
To see those borrowed tears that Sinon sheeds! 
Priam, why art thou old, and yet not wise? 
For every tear he falls a Troyan bleeds; 
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds; 
 Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity, 
 Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 
 
"Such devils steal effects from lightless hell, 
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold, 
And in that cold, hot burning fire doth dwell; 
These contraries such unity do hold 
Only to flatter fools, and make them bold: 
 So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter, 
 That he finds means to burn his Troy with water." 
 
Here all enraged, such passion her assails 
That patience is quite beaten from her breast; 
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 
Comparing him to that unhappy guest 
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest. 
 At last she smilingly with this gives o'er; 
 "Fool, fool," quoth she, "his wounds will not be sore." 
 
Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 
And time doth weary time with her complaining; 
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow, 
And both she thinks too long with her remaining. 
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining; 
 Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 
 And they that watch see time how slow it creeps; 
 
Which all this time hath overslipped her thought, 
That she with painted images hath spent, 
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought 
By deep surmise of others' detriment, 
Losing her woes in shows of discontent. 
 It easeth some, though none it ever cured, 
 To think their dolor others have endured. 
 
But now the mindful messenger, come back, 
Brings home his lord and other company, 
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black, 
And round about her tear-distained eye 
Blue circles streamed, like rainbows in the sky. 
 These water-galls in her dim element 
 Foretell new storms to those already spent; 
 
Which when her sad-beholding husband saw, 
Amazedly in her sad face he stares: 
Her eyes, though sod in tears, looked red and raw, 
Her lively color killed with deadly cares. 
He hath no power to ask her how she fares. 
 Both stood like old acquaintance in a trance, 
 Met far from home, wond'ring each other's chance. 
 
At last he takes her by the bloodless hand, 
And thus begins: "What uncouth ill event 
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair color spent? 
Why art thou thus attired in discontent? 
 Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness, 
 And tell thy grief, that we may give redress." 
 
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe; 
At length addressed to answer his desire, 
She modestly prepares to let them know 
Her honor is ta'en prisoner by the foe, 
 While Collatine and his consorted lords 
 With sad attention long to hear her words. 
 
And now this pale swan in her wat'ry nest 
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending: 
"Few words," quoth she, "shall fit the trespass best, 
Where no excuse can give the fault amending. 
In me moe woes than words are now depending, 
 And my laments would be drawn out too long 
 To tell them all with one poor tired tongue. 
 
"Then be this all the task it hath to say: 
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay 
Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head, 
And what wrong else may be imagined 
 By foul enforcement might be done to me, 
 From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 
 
"For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight, 
With shining falchion in my chamber came 
A creeping creature, with a flaming light, 
And softly cried, 'Awake, thou Roman dame, 
And entertain my love, else lasting shame 
 On thee and thine this night I will inflict, 
 If thou my love's desire do contradict. 
 
"'For some hard-favored groom of thine, 'quoth he, 
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will, 
I'll murther straight, and then I'll slaughter thee, 
And swear I found you where you did fulfill 
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill 
 The lechers in their deed. This act will be 
 My fame, and thy perpetual infamy.' 
 
"With this I did begin to start and cry, 
And then against my heart he set his sword, 
Swearing, unless I took all patiently, 
I should not live to speak another word; 
So should my shame still rest upon record, 
 And never be forgot in mighty Rome 
 Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom. 
 
"Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak 
(And far the weaker with so strong a fear), 
My bloody judge forbod my tongue to speak, 
No rightful plea might plead for justice there. 
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear 
 That my poor beauty had purloined his eyes, 
 And when the judge is robbed, the prisoner dies. 
 
"O, teach me how to make mine own excuse, 
Or (at the least) this refuge let me find: 
Though my gross blood be stained with this abuse, 
Immaculate and spotless is my mind; 
That was not forced, that never was inclined 
 To accessary yieldings, but still pure 
 Doth in her poisoned closet yet endure." 
 
Lo here the hopeless merchant of this loss, 
With head declined, and voice dammed up with woe, 
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across, 
From lips new waxen pale begins to blow 
The grief away that stops his answer so; 
 But wretched as he is he strives in vain, 
 What he breathes out, his breath drinks up again. 
 
As through an arch the violent roaring tide 
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste, 
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast 
(In rage sent out, recalled in rage, being past), 
 Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw, 
 To push grief on, and back the same grief draw. 
 
Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh: 
"Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth 
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh. 
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh 
 More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 
 To drown [one] woe, one pair of weeping eyes. 
 
"And for my sake when I might charm thee so, 
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me: 
Be suddenly revenged on my foe, 
Thine, mine, his own. Suppose thou dost defend me 
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me 
 Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die, 
 For sparing justice feeds iniquity. 
 
"But ere I name him, you fair lords," quoth she 
(Speaking to those that came with Collatine), 
"Shall plight your honorable faiths to me 
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine, 
For 'tis a meritorious fair design 
 To chase injustice with revengeful arms: 
 Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms." 
 
At this request, with noble disposition 
Each present lord began to promise aid, 
As bound in knighthood to her imposition, 
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewrayed. 
But she that yet her sad task hath not said, 
 The protestation stops: "O, speak," quoth she, 
 "How may this forced stain be wiped from me? 
 
"What is the quality of my offense, 
Being constrained with dreadful circumstance? 
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 
My low-declined honor to advance? 
May any terms acquit me from this chance? 
 The poisoned fountain clears itself again, 
 And why not I from this compelled stain?', 
 
With this they all at once began to say, 
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears, 
While with a joyless smile she turns away 
The face, that map which deep impression bears 
Of hard misfortune, carved [in it] with tears. 
 "No, no," quoth she, "no dame hereafter living 
 By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving." 
 
Here with a sigh as if her heart would break, 
She throws forth Tarquin's name: "He, he," she says, 
But more than "he" her poor tongue could not speak, 
Till after many accents and delays, 
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays, 
 She utters this, "He, he, fair lords, 'tis he, 
 That guides this hand to give this wound to me." 
 
Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast 
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed; 
That blow did bail it from the deep unrest 
Of that polluted prison where it breathed. 
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed 
 Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly 
 Live's lasting date from cancelled destiny. 
 
Stone-still, astonished with this deadly deed, 
Stood Collatine, and all his lordly crew, 
Till Lucrece' father that beholds her bleed, 
Himself on her self-slaught'red body threw, 
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 
 The murd'rous knife, and as it left the place, 
 Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase; 
 
And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide 
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood 
Circles her body in on every side, 
Who like a late-sacked island vastly stood 
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood. 
 Some of her blood still pure and red remained, 
 And some looked black, and that false Tarquin stained. 
 
About the mourning and congealed face 
Of that black blood a wat'ry rigol goes, 
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place, 
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes, 
Corrupted blood some watery token shows, 
 And blood untainted still doth red abide, 
 Blushing at that which is so putrefied. 
 
"Daughter, dear daughter," old Lucretius cries, 
"That life was mine which thou hast here deprived. 
If in the child the father's image lies, 
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 
Thou wast not to this end from me derived. 
 If children predecease progenitors, 
 We are their offspring, and they none of ours. 
 
"Poor broken glass, I often did behold 
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born, 
But now that fair fresh mirror dim and old 
Shows me a bare-boned death by time outworn. 
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn, 
 And shivered all the beauty of my glass, 
 That I no more can see what once I was! 
 
"O Time, cease thou thy course and last no longer, 
If they surcease to be that should survive. 
Shall rotten Death make conquest of the stronger, 
And leave the falt'ring feeble souls alive? 
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 
 Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see 
 Thy father die, and not thy father thee!" 
 
By this starts Collatine as from a dream, 
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place, 
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face, 
And counterfeits to die with her a space, 
 Till manly shame bids him possess his breath, 
 And live to be revenged on her death. 
 
The deep vexation of his inward soul 
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue, 
Who mad that sorrow should his use control, 
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long, 
Begins to talk, but through his lips do throng 
 Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 
 That no man could distinguish what he said. 
 
Yet sometime "Tarquin" was pronounced plain, 
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore. 
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain, 
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more. 
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er; 
 Then son and father weep with equal strife, 
 Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife. 
 
The one doth call her his, the other his, 
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 
The father says, "She's mine." "O, mine she is," 
Replies her husband, "do not take away 
My sorrow's interest, let no mourner say 
 He weeps for her, for she was only mine, 
 And only must be wailed by Collatine." 
 
"O," quoth Lucretius, "I did give that life 
Which she too early and too late hath spilled." 
"Woe, woe," quoth Collatine, "she was my wife, 
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath killed." 
"My daughter!" and "My wife!" with clamors filled 
 The dispersed air, who holding Lucrece' life, 
 Answered their cries, "My daughter!" and "My wife!" 

Brutus, who plucked the knife from Lucrece' side, 
Seeing such emulation in their woe, 
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show. 
He with the Romans was esteemed so 
 As seely jeering idiots are with kings, 
 For sportive words, and utt'ring foolish things. 
 
But now he throws that shallow habit by, 
Wherein deep policy did him disguise, 
And armed his long-hid wits advisedly, 
To check the tears in Collatinus' eyes. 
"Thou wronged lord of Rome," quoth he, "arise, 
 Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 
 Now set thy long-experienced wit to school. 
 
"Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe? 
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds? 
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow 
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 
Such childish humor from weak minds proceeds; 
 Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so, 
 To slay herself, that should have slain her foe. 
 
"Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart 
In such relenting dew of lamentations, 
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part, 
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations, 
That they will suffer these abominations 
 (Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced) 
 By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 
 
"Now by the Capitol that we adore, 
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stained, 
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store, 
By all our country rights in Rome maintained, 
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complained 
 Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife, 
 We will revenge the death of this true wife." 
 
This said, he strook his hand upon his breast, 
And kissed the fatal knife to end his vow; 
And to his protestation urged the rest, 
Who wond'ring at him, did his words allow. 
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow, 
 And that deep vow which Brutus made before, 
 He doth again repeat, and that they swore. 
 
When they had sworn to this advised doom, 
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence, 
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome, 
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offense; 
Which being done with speedy diligence, 
 The Romans plausibly did give consent 
 To Tarquin's everlasting banishment. 