"To kill myself," quoth she, "alack, what were it, 
But with my body my poor soul's pollution? 
They that lose half with greater patience bear it 
Than they whose whole is swallowed in confusion. 
That mother tries a merciless conclusion, 
 Who having two sweet babes, when death takes one, 
 Will slay the other, and be nurse to none. 
 
"My body or my soul, which was the dearer, 
When the one pure, the other made divine? 
Whose love of either to myself was nearer, 
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine? 
Ay me, the bark pilled from the lofty pine, 
 His leaves will wither and his sap decay; 
 So must my soul, her bark being pilled away. 
 
"Her house is sacked, her quiet interrupted, 
Her mansion battered by the enemy, 
Her sacred temple spotted, spoiled, corrupted, 
Grossly engirt with daring infamy.: 
Then let it not be called impiety, 
 If in this blemished fort I make some hole 
 Through which I may convey this troubled soul. 
 
"Yet die I will not till my Collatine 
Have heard the cause of my untimely death, 
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath. 
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath, 
 Which by him tainted shall for him be spent, 
 And as his due writ in my testament. 
 
"My honor I'll bequeath unto the knife 
That wounds my body so dishonored. 
'Tis honor to deprive dishonored life, 
The one will live, the other being dead. 
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred, 
 For in my death I murther shameful scorn: 
 My shame so dead, mine honor is new born. 
 
"Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost, 
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee? 
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast, 
By whose example thou revenged mayst be. 
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me: 
 Myself thy friend will kill myself thy foe, 
 And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so. 
 
"This brief abridgment of my will I make: 
My soul and body to the skies and ground, 
My resolution, husband, do thou take, 
Mine honor be the knife's that makes my wound, 
My shame be his that did my fame confound; 
 And all my fame that lives disbursed be 
 To those that live and think no shame of me. 
 
"Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will; 
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it! 
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill; 
My live's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it. 
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say, 'So be it;' 
 Yield to my hand, my hand shall conquer thee: 
 Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be." 
 
This plot of death when sadly she had laid, 
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes, 
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies; 
For fleet-winged duty with thought's feathers flies. 
 Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so 
 As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow. 
 
Her mistress she doth give demure good morrow, 
With soft slow tongue, true mark of modesty, 
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow 
(For why her face wore sorrow's livery), 
But durst not ask of her audaciously, 
 Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 
 Nor why her fair cheeks over-washed with woe. 
 
But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set, 
Each flow'r moist'ned like a melting eye, 
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet 
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky, 
 Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light, 
 Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night. 
 
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand, 
Like ivory conduits coral cesterns filling: 
One justly weeps, the other takes in hand 
No cause, but company of her drops spilling. 
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing, 
 Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts, 
 And then they drown their eyes, or break their hearts. 
 
For men have marble, women waxen minds, 
And therefore are they formed as marble will; 
The weak oppressed, th' impression of strange kinds 
Is formed in them by force, by fraud, or skill. 
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 
 No more than wax shall be accounted evil, 
 Wherein is stamped the semblance of a devil. 
 
Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain, 
Lays open all the little worms that creep; 
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep. 
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep; 
 Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks, 
 Poor women's faces are their own faults' books. 
 
No man inveigh against the withered flower, 
But chide rough winter that the flow'r hath killed; 
Not that devoured, but that which doth devour, 
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild 
Poor women's faults that they are so fulfilled 
 With men's abuses: those proud lords to blame 
 Make weak-made women tenants to their shame. 
 
The president whereof in Lucrece view, 
Assailed by night with circumstances strong 
Of present death, and shame that might ensue 
By that her death, to do her husband wrong. 
Such danger to resistance did belong 
 That dying fear through all her body spread, 
 And who cannot abuse a body dead? 
 
By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak 
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 
"My girl," quoth she, "on what occasion break 
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining? 
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining, 
 Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood; 
 If tears could helP, mine own would do me good. 
 
"But tell me, girl, when went" (and there she stayed 
Till after a deep groan) "Tarquin from hence?" 
"Madam, ere I was up," replied the maid, 
"The more to blame my sluggard negligence. 
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense: 
 Myself was stirring ere the break of day, 
 And ere I rose was Tarquin gone away. 
 
"But, lady, if your maid may be so bold, 
She would request to know your heaviness." 
"O, peace," quoth Lucrece, "if it should be told, 
The repetition cannot make it less; 
For more it is than I can well express, 
 And that deep torture may be called a hell, 
 When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 
 
"Go get me hither paper, ink, and pen, 
Yet save that labor, for I have them here. -- 
What should I say? -- One of my husband's men 
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear 
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear. 
 Bid him with speed prepare to carry it, 
 The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.', 
 
Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write, 
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill. 
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight, 
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will; 
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill: 
 Much like a press of people at a door, 
 Throng her inventions, which shall go before. 
 
At last she thus begins: "Thou worthy lord 
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee, 
Health to thy person; next, vouchsafe t' afford 
(If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see) 
Some present speed to come and visit me. 
 So I commend me from our house in grief, 
 My woes are tedious, though my words are brief." 
 
Here folds she up the tenure of her woe, 
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly. 
By this short schedule Collatine may know 
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality. 
She dares not thereof make discovery, 
 Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse, 
 Ere she with blood had stained her stained excuse. 
 
Besides, the life and feeling of her passion 
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her, 
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion 
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her 
From that suspicion which the world might bear her. 
 To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter 
 With words, till action might become them better. 
 
To see sad sights moves more than hear them told, 
For then the eye interprets to the ear 
The heavy motion that it doth behold, 
When every part a part of woe doth bear. 
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear. 
 Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords, 
 And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words. 
 
Her letter now is sealed, and on it writ, 
"At Ardea to my lord with more than haste." 
The post attends, and she delivers it, 
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast 
As lagging fowls before the northern blast. 
 Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems: 
 Extremity still urgeth such extremes. 
 
The homely villain cur'sies to her low, 
And blushing on her with a steadfast eye, 
Receives the scroll without or yea or no, 
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie. 
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie 
 Imagine every eye beholds their blame, 
 For Lucrece thought he blushed to see her shame, 
 
When, seely groom, God wot, it was defect 
Of spirit, life, and bold audacity. 
Such harmless creatures have a true respect 
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely; 
 Even so this pattern of the worn-out age 
 Pawned honest looks, but laid no words to gage. 
 
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust, 
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 
She thought he blushed, as knowing Tarquin's lust, 
And blushing with him, wistly on him gazed; 
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed. 
 The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish, 
 The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 
 
But long she thinks till he return again, 
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone; 
The weary time she cannot entertain, 
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan. 
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 
 That she her plaints a little while doth stay, 
 Pausing for means to mourn some newer way. 
 
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece 
Of skillful painting, made for Priam's Troy, 
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece, 
For Helen's rape the city to destroy, 
Threat'ning cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy, 
 Which the conceited painter drew so proud, 
 As heaven (it seemed) to kiss the turrets bowed. 
 
A thousand lamentable objects there, 
In scorn of nature, art gave liveless life: 
Many a dry drop seemed a weeping tear, 
Shed for the slaught'red husband by the wife; 
The red blood reeked, to show the painter's strife, 
 And dying eyes gleamed forth their ashy lights, 
 Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights. 
 
There might you see the laboring pioner 
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust, 
And from the tow'rs of Troy there would appear 
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust. 
 Such sweet observance in this work was had, 
 That one might see those far-off eyes look sad. 
 
In great commanders, grace and majesty 
You might behold triumphing in their faces; 
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity; 
And here and there the painter interlaces 
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces, 
 Which heartless peasants did so well resemble, 
 That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble. 
 
In Ajax and Ulysses, O what art 
Of physiognomy might one behold! 
The face of either ciphered either's heart, 
Their face their manners most expressly told: 
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor rolled, 
 But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 
 Showed deep regard and smiling government. 
 
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand, 
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight, 
Making such sober action with his hand, 
That it beguiled attention, charmed the sight. 
In speech it seemed his beard, all silver white, 
 Wagged up and down, and from his lips did fly 
 Thin winding breath, which purled up to the sky. 
 
About him were a press of gaping faces, 
Which seemed to swallow up his sound advice, 
All jointly list'ning, but with several graces, 
As if some mermaid did their ears entice, 
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice; 
 The scalps of many, almost hid behind, 
 To jump up higher seemed to mock the mind. 
 
Here one man's hand leaned on another's head, 
His nose being shadowed by his neighbor's ear; 
Here one being thronged bears back, all boll'n and red, 
Another, smothered, seems to pelt and swear, 
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 
 As but for loss of Nestor's golden words, 
 It seemed they would debate with angry swords. 
 
For much imaginary work was there, 
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind, 
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 
Griped in an armed hand, himself behind 
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind: 
 A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head 
 Stood for the whole to be imagined. 
 
And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy, 
When their brave hope, bold Hector, marched to field, 
Stood many Troyan mothers, sharing joy 
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield, 
And to their hope they such odd action yield 
 That through their light joy seemed to appear 
 (Like bright things stained) a kind of heavy fear. 
 
And from the strond of Dardan, where they fought, 
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran, 
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought 
With swelling ridges, and their ranks began 
To break upon the galled shore, and than 
 Retire again, till meeting greater ranks, 
 They join, and shoot their foam at Simois' banks. 
 
To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come, 
To find a face where all distress is stelled. 
Many she sees where cares have carved some, 
But none where all distress and dolor dwelled, 
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld, 
 Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes, 
 Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 
 
In her the painter had anatomized 
Time's ruin, beauty's wrack, and grim care's reign; 
Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguised, 
Of what she was, no semblance did remain. 
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 
 Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed, 
 Showed life imprisoned in a body dead. 
 
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes, 
And shapes her sorrow to the beldame's woes, 
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes; 
The painter was no god to lend her those, 
 And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong, 
 To give her so much grief, and not a tongue. 
 
"Poor instrument," quoth she, "without a sound, 
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue, 
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound, 
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong, 
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long, 
 And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 
 Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies. 
 
"Show me the strumpet that began this stir, 
That with my nails her beauty I may tear. 
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur 
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear; 
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here, 
 And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye, 
 The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die. 
 
"Why should the private pleasure of some one 
Become the public plague of many moe? 
Let sin, alone committed, light alone 
Upon his head that hath transgressed so; 
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe. 
 For one's offense why should so many fall, 
 To plague a private sin in general? 
 
"Lo here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies, 
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus sounds, 
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies, 
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds, 
And one man's lust these many lives confounds. 
 Had doting Priam checked his son's desire, 
 Troy had been bright with fame, and not with fire." 
 
Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes, 
For sorrow, like a heavy hanging bell, 
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell: 
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell 
 To pencilled pensiveness and colored sorrow; 
 She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow. 
 
She throws her eyes about the painting round, 
And who she finds forlorn, she doth lament. 
At last she sees a wretched image bound, 
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent; 
His face, though full of cares, yet showed content; 
 Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 
 So mild that patience seemed to scorn his woes. 
 
In him the painter labored with his skill 
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show 
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still, 
A brow unbent, that seemed to welcome woe, 
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so 
 That blushing red no guilty instance gave, 
 Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have. 
 
But like a constant and confirmed devil, 
He entertained a show so seeming just, 
And therein so ensconced his secret evil, 
That jealousy itself could not mistrust 
False creeping craft and perjury should thrust 
 Into so bright a day such black-faced storms, 
 Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 
 
The well-skilled workman this mild image drew 
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story 
The credulous old Priam after slew; 
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory 
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 
 And little stars shot from their fixed places, 
 When their glass fell wherein they viewed their faces. 
 
This picture she advisedly perused, 
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill, 
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused: 
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill. 
And still on him she gazed, and gazing still, 
 Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied, 
 That she concludes the picture was belied. 
 
"It cannot be," quoth she, "that so much guile" -- 
She would have said, "can lurk in such a look"; 
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while, 
And from her tongue "can lurk" from "cannot" took: 
"It cannot be" she in that sense forsook, 
 And turned it thus, "It cannot be, I find, 
 But such a face should bear a wicked mind. 
 
"For even as subtile Sinon here is painted, 
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild 
(As if with grief or travail he had fainted), 
To me came Tarquin armed to beguild 
With outward honesty, but yet defiled 
 With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish, 
 So did I Tarquin, so my Troy did perish. 