"O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night, 
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime, 
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light, 
Make war against proportioned course of time; 
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb 
 His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed, 
 Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head. 
 
"With rotten damps ravish the morning air; 
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 
The life of purity, the supreme fair, 
Ere he arrive his weary noontide prick, 
And let thy musty vapors march so thick 
 That in their smoky ranks his smoth'red light 
 May set at noon, and make perpetual night. 
 
"Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child, 
The silver-shining queen he would distain; 
Her twinkling handmaids too (by him defiled) 
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again. 
So should I have co-partners in my pain, 
 And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage, 
 As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage. 
 
"Where now I have no one to blush with me, 
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine, 
To mask their brows and hide their infamy, 
But I alone, alone must sit and pine, 
Seasoning the earth with show'rs of silver brine, 
 Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans, 
 Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans. 
 
"O Night, thou furnace of foul reeking smoke! 
Let not the jealous Day behold that face, 
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak 
Immodestly lies martyred with disgrace. 
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place, 
 That all the faults which in thy reign are made 
 May likewise be sepulchered in thy shade. 
 
"Make me not object to the tell-tale Day: 
The light will show, charactered in my brow, 
The story of sweet chastity's decay, 
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow; 
Yea, the illiterate that know not how 
 To cipher what is writ in learned books, 
 Will cote my loathsome trespass in my looks. 
 
"The nurse to still her child will tell my story, 
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 
The orator to deck his oratory 
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame; 
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame, 
 Will tie the hearers to attend each line, 
 How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 
 
"Let my good name, that senseless reputation, 
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted: 
If that be made a theme for disputation, 
The branches of another root are rotted, 
And undeserved reproach to him allotted, 
 That is as clear from this attaint of mine 
 As I ere this was pure to Collatine. 
 
"O unseen shame, invisible disgrace! 
O unfelt sore, crest-wounding private scar! 
Reproach is stamped in Collatinus' face, 
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar, 
How he in peace is wounded, not in war. 
 Alas, how many bear such shameful blows, 
 Which not themselves but he that gives them knows! 
 
"If, Collatine, thine honor lay in me, 
From me by strong assault it is bereft: 
My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee, 
Have no perfection of my summer left, 
But robbed and ransacked by injurious theft. 
 In thy weak hive a wand'ring wasp hath crept, 
 And sucked the honey which thy chaste bee kept. 
 
"Yet am I guilty of thy honor's wrack, 
Yet for thy honor did I entertain him; 
Coming from thee, I could not Put him back, 
For it had been dishonor to disdain him. 
Besides, of weariness he did complain him, 
 And talked of virtue: O unlooked-for evil, 
 When virtue is profaned in such a devil! 
 
"Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud? 
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud? 
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts? 
Or kings be breakers of their own behests? 
 But no perfection is so absolute, 
 That some impurity doth not pollute. 
 
"The aged man that coffers up his gold 
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits, 
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold, 
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits, 
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 
 Having no other pleasure of his gain 
 But torment that it cannot cure his pain. 
 
"So then he hath it when he cannot use it, 
And leaves it to be mast'red by his young, 
Who in their pride do presently abuse it; 
Their father was too weak, and they too strong, 
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long. 
 The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours 
 Even in the moment that we call them ours. 
 
"Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring, 
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flow'rs, 
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing, 
What virtue breeds iniquity devours: 
We have no good that we can say is ours, 
 But ill-annexed Opportunity 
 Or kills his life or else his quality. 
 
"O Opportunity, thy guilt is great! 
'Tis thou that execut'st the traitor's treason; 
Thou sets the wolf where he the lamb may get; 
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason, 
 And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him, 
 Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him. 
 
"Thou makest the vestal violate her oath, 
Thou blowest the fire when temperance is thawed, 
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murth'rest troth, 
Thou foul abettor, thou notorious bawd, 
Thou plantest scandal, and displacest laud. 
 Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief, 
 Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief. 
 
"Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame, 
Thy private feasting to a public fast, 
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name, 
Thy sug'red tongue to bitter wormwood taste; 
Thy violent vanities can never last. 
 How comes it then, vile Opportunity, 
 Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee? 
 
"When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend, 
And bring him where his suit may be obtained? 
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chained? 
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pained? 
 The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee, 
 But they ne'er meet with Opportunity. 
 
"The patient dies while the physician sleeps, 
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds, 
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps, 
Advice is sporting while infection breeds. 
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds. 
 Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murther's rages, 
 Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages. 
 
"When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee, 
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid: 
They buy thy help, but Sin ne'er gives a fee, 
He gratis comes, and thou art well apaid, 
As well to hear as grant what he hath said. 
 My Collatine would else have come to me 
 When Tarquin did, but he was stayed by thee. 
 
"Guilty thou art of murther and of theft, 
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift, 
Guilty of incest, that abomination; 
An accessary by thine inclination 
 To all sins past and all that are to come, 
 From the creation to the general doom. 
 
"Misshapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night, 
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care, 
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight, 
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare! 
Thou nursest all, and murth'rest all that are. 
 O, hear me then, injurious shifting Time, 
 Be guilty of my death, since of my crime. 
 
"Why hath thy servant Opportunity 
Betrayed the hours thou gav'st me to repose? 
Cancelled my fortunes, and enchained me 
To endless date of never-ending woes? 
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes, 
 To eat up errors by opinion bred, 
 Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed. 
 
"Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 
To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light, 
To stamp the seal of time in aged things, 
To wake the morn, and sentinel the night, 
To wrong the wronger till he render right, 
 To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 
 And smear with dust their glitt'ring golden tow'rs; 
 
"To fill with worm-holes stately monuments, 
To feed oblivion with decay of things, 
To blot old books, and alter their contents, 
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 
To dry the old oak's sap, and cherish springs, 
 To spoil antiquities of hammered steel, 
 And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel; 
 
"To show the beldame daughters of her daughter, 
To make the child a man, the man a child, 
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter, 
To tame the unicorn and lion wild, 
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled, 
 To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops, 
 And waste huge stones with little water-drops. 
 
"Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage, 
Unless thou couldst return to make amends? 
One poor retiring minute in an age 
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends, 
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 
 O this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back, I could
prevent this storm, and shun thy wrack! 
 
"Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity, 
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight. 
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night. 
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright, 
 And the dire thought of his committed evil 
 Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil. 
 
"Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 
Afflict him in his bed with bedred groans; 
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances 
To make him moan, but pity not his moans; 
Stone him with hard'ned hearts harder than stones, 
 And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 
 Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness. 
 
"Let him have time to tear his curled hair, 
Let him have time against himself to rave, 
Let him have time of Time's help to despair, 
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave, 
 And time to see one that by alms doth live 
 Disdain to him disdained scraps to give. 
 
"Let him have time to see his friends his foes, 
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes 
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short 
His time of folly and his time of sport; 
 And ever let his unrecalling crime 
 Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 
 
"O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad, 
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill. 
At his own shadow let the thief run mad, 
Himself himself seek every hour to kill. 
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 
 For who so base would such an office have 
 As sland'rous deathsman to so base a slave? 
 
"The baser is he, coming from a king, 
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate; 
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 
That makes him honored, or begets him hate; 
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state. 
 The moon being clouded presently is missed, 
 But little stars may hide them when they list. 
 
"The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 
And unperceived fly with the filth away, 
But if the like the snow-white swan desire, 
The stain upon his silver down will stay. 
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day; 
 Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 
 But eagles gazed upon with every eye. 
 
"Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools, 
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators! 
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools, 
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 
To trembling clients be you mediators. 
 For me, I force not argument a straw, 
 Since that my case is past the help of law. 
 
"In vain I rail at Opportunity, 
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night, 
In vain I cavil with mine infamy, 
In vain I spurn at my confirmed despite: 
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right. 
 The remedy indeed to do me good 
 Is to let forth my foul defiled blood. 
 
"Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree? 
Honor thyself to rid me of this shame, 
For if I die, my honor lives in thee, 
But if I live, thou liv'st in my defame. 
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 
 And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe, 
 Kill both thyself and her for yielding so." 
 
This said, from her betumbled couch she starteth, 
To find some desp'rate instrument of death, 
But this no slaughter-house no tool imparteth, 
To make more vent for passage of her breath, 
Which thronging through her lips, so vanisheth 
 As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes, 
 Or that which from discharged cannon fumes. 
 
"In vain," quoth she, "I live, and seek in vain 
Some happy mean to end a hapless life. 
I feared by Tarquin's falchion to be slain, 
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife; 
But when I feared, I was a loyal wife: 
 So am I now -- O no, that cannot be, 
 Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me. 
 
"O, that is gone for which I sought to live, 
And therefore now I need not fear to die. 
To clear this spot by death (at least) I give 
A badge of fame to slander's livery, 
A dying life to living infamy. 
 Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away, 
 To burn the guiltless casket where it lay! 
 
"Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know 
The stained taste of violated troth; 
I will not wrong thy true affection so, 
To flatter thee with an infringed oath; 
This bastard graff shall never come to growth. 
 He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute, 
 That thou art doting father of his fruit. 
 
"Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought, 
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state, 
But thou shalt know thy int'rest was not bought 
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate. 
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 
 And with my trespass never will dispense, 
 I ill life to death acquit my forced offense. 
 
"I will not poison thee with my attaint, 
Nor fold my fault in cleanly coined excuses; 
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses. 
My tongue shall utter all, mine eyes like sluices, 
 As from a mountain spring that feeds a dale, 
 Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale." 
 
By this, lamenting Philomele had ended 
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow, 
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended 
To ugly hell, when lo the blushing morrow 
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow; 
 But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 
 And therefore still in night would cloist'red be. 
 
Revealing day through every cranny spies, 
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping, 
To whom she sobbing speaks: "O eye of eyes, 
Why pry'st thou through my window? Leave thy peeping, 
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping; 
 Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light, 
 For day hath nought to do what's done by night." 
 
Thus cavils she with every thing she sees: 
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees. 
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild; 
Continuance tames the one, the other wild, 
 Like an unpracticed swimmer plunging still, 
 With too much labor drowns for want of skill. 
 
So she, deep drenched in a sea of care, 
Holds disputation with each thing she views, 
And to herself all sorrow doth compare; 
No object but her passion's strength renews; 
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 
 Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words, 
 Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords. 
 
The little birds that tune their morning's joy 
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody, 
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy, 
Sad souls are slain in merry company, 
Grief best is pleased with grief's society; 
 True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed 
 When with like semblance it is sympathized. 
 
'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore, 
He ten times pines that pines beholding food, 
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more, 
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good; 
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood, 
 Who being stopped, the bounding banks o'erflows; 
 Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows. 
 
"You mocking birds," quoth she, "your tunes entomb 
Within your hollow swelling feathered breasts, 
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb, 
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests. 
 Relish your nimble notes to Pleasing ears, 
 Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears. 
 
"Come, Philomele, that sing'st of ravishment, 
Make thy sad grove in my dishevelled hair; 
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment, 
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear, 
And with deep groans the diapason bear; 
 For burthen-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still, 
 While thou on Tereus descants better skill. 
 
"And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part 
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I, 
To imitate thee well, against my heart 
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye, 
Who if it wink shall thereon fall and die. 
 These means, as frets upon an instrument, 
 Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment. 
 
"And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day, 
As shaming any eye should thee behold, 
Some dark deep desert seated from the way, 
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold, 
Will we find out; and there we will unfold 
 To creatures stern, sad tunes to change their kinds; 
 Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds." 
 
As the poor frighted deer that stands at gaze, 
Wildly determining which way to fly, 
Or one encompassed with a winding maze, 
that cannot tread the way out readily, 
So with herself is she in mutiny, 
 To live or die which of the twain were better, 
 When life is shamed and death reproach's debtor.