<SHRVS> You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds
(Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is embossed),
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss,
And twice today picked out the dullest scent.
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Thou art a fool; if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well, and look unto them all,
tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
What's here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
He breathes, my lord.  Were he not warmed with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly. 
O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! 
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conveyed to bed,
Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest.
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound; 
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight,
And with a low submissive reverence 
Say,"What is it your honor will command?" 
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say, "Will't please your lordship cool your hands?"
Some one be ready with a costly suit,
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease.
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs;
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.
Take him up gently and to bed with him, 
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds. 
Belike some noble gentleman that means
(Travelling some journey) to repose him here.
How now? who is it? An't please your honor, players
Bid them come near. Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
So please your lordship to accept our duty.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember
Since once he played a farmer's eldest son.
'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well.
I have forgot your name; but sure that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally performed. 
I think 'twas Soto that your honor means. 
'Tis very true; thou didst it excellent. 
Well, you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand,
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play tonight;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Lest, over-eyeing of his odd behavior
(For yet his honor never heard a play),
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves, 
Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one.
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dressed in all suits like a lady;
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber, 
And call him madam, do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love, 
He bear himself with honorable action, 
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say,"What is't your honor will command,
Wherein your lady, and your humble wife,
May show her duty and make known her love?"
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin (being close conveyed)
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst;
I know the boy will well usurp the grace 
Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewomen 
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
Will't please your [lordship] drink a cup of sack?
Will't please your honor taste of these conserves?
What raiment will your honor wear today?
Heaven cease this idle humor in your honor!
O that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions, and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn! 
O, this is it that makes your servants droop! 
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O  noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? Hark, Apollo plays,   
And twenty caged nightingales do sing.
Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch,
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrow the ground.
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark.  Or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
Say thou wilt course, thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.
Dost thou love pictures?  We will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook, 
And Cytherea all in sedges hid, 
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord.
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'errun her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world,
And yet she is inferior to none.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream?  Or have I dreamed till now? 
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savors, and I feel soft things. 
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed, 
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
And once again a pot o' th' smallest ale.
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O how we joy to see your wit restored!
O that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream,
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap,
But did I never speak of all that time?
O yes, my lord, but very idle words,
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door,
And rail upon the hostess of the house,
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts.
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckoned up, 
As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece, 
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell,
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends! 
Amen. I thank thee, thou shalt not lose by it.
Marry, I fare well, for here is cheer enough.
Here, noble lord, what is thy will with her?
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me "lord"; I am your goodman.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband, 
I am your wife in all obedience.
I know it well.  What must I call her? Madam.
Madam, and nothing else, so lords call ladies. 
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamed, 
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
Thrice-noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or if not so, until the sun be set.
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed.
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
Your honor's players, hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy, 
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, 
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. 
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
What, household stuff? It is a kind of history.
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy, 
And by my father's love and leave am armed
With his good will and thy good company, 
My trusty servant, well approved in all, 
Here let us breathe, and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii;
Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
And with saciety seeks to quench his thirst.
I am, in all affected as yourself,
Glad that you thus continue your resolve 
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire 
This virtue and this moral discipline, 
Let's be no Stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
And practice rhetoric in your common talk,
Music and poesy use to quicken you,
The mathematics, and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you:
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while, what company is this?
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther, 
For how I firmly am resolved you know: 
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder.
If either of you both love Katherina,
Because I know you well, and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
To cart her rather; she's too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Mates, maid, how mean you that? No mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear.
Iwis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool,
And paint your face, and use you like a fool.
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
Husht, master, here's some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward. 
But in the other's silence do I see 
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Well said, master, mum, and gaze your fill.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in,
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Put finger in the eye, and she knew why.
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe;
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look and practice by myself.
Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief. Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell, 
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved. 
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments, and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth.  If you, Hortensio,
Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing-up,
And so farewell.  Katherina, you may stay,
For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not?
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely.
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness, 
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear 
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was: 
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now,
Affection is not rated from the heart.
If love have touched you, nought remains but so,
Gramercies, lad. Go forward, this contents;
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
Master, you looked so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strond.
Saw you no more?  Marked you not how her sister 
Began to scold, and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din? 
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the air. 
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her. 
Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir; if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home,
And therefore has he closely mewed her up,
Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.
I have it, Tranio. Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first. You will be schoolmaster,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device. It is; may it be done? 
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son, 
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, 
Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguished by our faces
For man or master. Then it follows thus:
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead;
Keep house and port and servants, as I should.
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colored hat and cloak.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient --
For so your father charged me at our parting;
"Be serviceable to my son," quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense --
I am content to be Lucentio, 
Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves, 
And let me be a slave, t' achieve that maid 
Whose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
Sirrah, come hither,'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I killed a man, and fear I was descried.
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life.
You understand me? Ay, sir! --  ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth, 
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
The better for him, would I were so too! 
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;
But in all places else [your] master Lucentio.
One thing more rests, that thyself execute --
To make one among these wooers.  If thou ask me why,
Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
My lord, you nod, you do not mind the play.
Verona, for a while I take my leave
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here,  sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate,
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Faith, sirrah, and you'll not knock, I'll ring it.
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it. 
Help, [masters], help, my master is mad.
Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Con tutto il core, ben trovato,  may I say.
Rise, Grumio, rise, we will compound this quarrel.
Whom would to God I had well knocked at first,
Then had not Grumio come by the worst. 
A senseless villain!  Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate, 
And could not get him for my heart to do it. 
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience, I am Grumio's pledge.
Why, this' a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world 
To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
Where small experience grows.  But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased,
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Happily to wive and thrive as best I may.
Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home, 
And so am come abroad to see the world.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee, 
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favored wife? 
Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel;
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich. But th' art too much my friend,
Signior Hortensio,'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife
(As wealth is burthen of my wooing dance),
Be she as foul as was Florentius, love,
As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrowd
As Socrates' Xantippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes at least
Affection's edge in me.  [Whe'er] she is as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas,
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in, 
I will continue that I broached in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrowd and froward, so beyond all measure, 
That were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold. 
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.
Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman.
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her,
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is.
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her withholds from me [and] other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love;
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katherina will be wooed.
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,
That so I may by this device at least 
Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
And unsuspected court her by herself. 
Peace, Grumio, it is the rival of my love.
A proper stripling, and an amorous!
O, very well, I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir, I'll have them very fairly bound --
All books of love, see that at any hand --
And see you read no other lectures to her.
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed;
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to.  What will you read to her?
What e'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured, 
As firmly as yourself were still in place,
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words 
Than you -- unless you were a scholar, sir. 
O this learning, what a thing it is!
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
Grumio, mum!  God save you, Signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man; for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help [me] to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love;
Listen to me, and if you speak me for, 
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either. 
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
No, say'st me so, friend?  What countryman?
Born in Verona, old [Antonio's] son.
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
And I do hope good days and long to see.
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange;
But if you have a stomach, to't a' God's name;
You shall have me assisting you in all.
Will he woo her? ay -- or I'll hang her.
Why came I hither but to that intent? 
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar? 
Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds, 
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ord'nance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush, fear boys with bugs. For he fears none.
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and [ours].
I promised we would be contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing,  whatsoe'er.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way 
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
He that has the two fair daughters? is't he you mean? 
Perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
Well begun, Tranio. Sir, a word ere you go.
And if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you? But so is not she.
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen, 
Baptista is a noble gentleman, 
To whom my father is not all unknown, 
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers,
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall.  Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
What, this gentleman will out-talk us all.
Sir, give him head, I know he'll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
The one as famous for a scolding tongue,
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's for me, let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors, 
And will not promise her to any man,
Until the elder sister first be wed. 
The younger then is free, and not before. 
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
And if you break the ice, and do this [feat],
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access -- whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive,
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
O excellent motion!  Fellows, let's be gone.
The motion's good indeed, and be it so,
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself, 
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me --
That I disdain; but for these other [gawds],
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat,
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Of all thy suitors here I charge [thee] tell
Whom thou lov'st best; see thou dissemble not.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
O then belike you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while.
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands. 
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Why, how now, dame, whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl, she weeps. 
Go ply thy needle, meddle not with her.
For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit, 
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? 
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.
What, in my sight?  Bianca, get thee in.
What, will you not suffer me?  Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance barefoot on her wedding-day,
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me, I will go sit and weep,
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here? Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.
Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.  God save 
And you, good sir!  Pray have you not a daughter 
Called Katherina, fair and virtuous?
I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.
You are too blunt, go to it orderly.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio, give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant.
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.
His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
Y' are welcome, sir, and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katherine, this I know, 
She is not for your turn, the more my grief. 
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.
Mistake me not, I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.
I know him well; you are welcome for his sake. 
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray
Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favor as the rest;
And toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray?
Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio. 
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well. You are very welcome, sir. 
Take you the lute, and you the set of books. 
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within! Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner.  You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left soly heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather than decreased.
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
After my death, the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns. 
And for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, 
In all my lands and leases whatsoever. 
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all;
So I to her, and so she yields to me,
For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
That [shake] not, though they blow perpetually.
How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale? 
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician? 
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Why then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Why no, for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowed her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
"Frets, call you these?" quoth she, "I'll fume with them."
And with that word she strook me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute,
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling jack, with twenty such vild terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
Now by the world, it is a lusty wench!
I love her ten times more than e'er I did.
O, how I long to have some chat with her!
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited.
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter; 
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, 
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you? 
I pray you do. I'll attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail, why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale;
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly washed with dew;
Say she be mute, and will not speak a word,
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence;
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week;
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banes, and when be married.
But here she comes, and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate, for that's your name, I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.:
They call me Katherine that do talk of me. 
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate, 
And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate-Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation --
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Moved! in good time!  Let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence. I knew you at the first
Why, what's a moveable? A joined-stool.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
Alas, good Kate, I will not burthen thee, 
For knowing thee to be but young and light.
Too light for such a swain as you to catch, 
And yet as heavy as my weight should be. 
O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp, i' faith you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
Yours, if you talk of tales, and so farewell.
What, with my tongue in your tail?  Nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman -- That I'll try.  
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.
If you strike me, you are no gentleman, 
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
A herald, Kate?  O, put me in thy books!
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
No cock of mine, you crow too like a craven.
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
It is my fashion when I see a crab.
Why, here's no crab, and therefore look not sour. 
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
Yet you are withered. 'Tis with cares. I care not.
Nay, hear you, Kate. In sooth you scape not so. 
I chafe you if I tarry. Let me go.
No, not a whit, I find you passing gentle:
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers.
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askaunce,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk;
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft, and affable. 
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O sland'rous world!  Kate like the hazel-twig 
Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue 
As hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.
A witty mother! witless else her son.
Am I not wise? Yes, keep you warm.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed;
And therefore setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
For by this light whereby I see thy beauty, 
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me; 
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate, 
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father. Never make denial;
I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
Call you me daughter?  Now I promise you
You have showed a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic,
A madcap ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talked of her, have talked amiss of her.
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove; 
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn:
For patience she will prove a second Grissel, 
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity; 
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
Is this your speeding? Nay then good night our part! 
Be patient, gentlemen, I choose her for myself.
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargained 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate,
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate, I will unto Venice 
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests, 
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine. 
I know not what to say, but give me your hands.
God send you joy, Petruchio, 'tis a match.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
I will to Venice, Sunday comes apace.
We will have rings and things, and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married a' Sunday.
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
The gain I seek is, quiet [in] the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter;
Now is the day we long have looked for.
I am your neighbor, and was suitor first. 
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess. 
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I. 
Greybeard, thy love doth freeze. But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back,'tis age that nourisheth.
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen, I will compound this strife.
'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,
Valens of Venice gold in needle-work;
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs 
To house or house-keeping. Then at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, 
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, 
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am strook in years, I must confess,
And if I die tomorrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
That "only" came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son.
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointer.
What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all. --
That she shall have, besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marsellis road.
What,  have I choked you with an argosy?
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
And twelve tight galleys.  These I will assure her,
And twice as much, what e'er thou off'rest next. 
Nay, I have off'red all, I have no more, 
And she can have no more than all I have;
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Why then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise; Gremio is outvied.
I must confess your offer is the best,
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own, else you must pardon me;
If you should die before him, where's her dower?
That's but a cavil; he is old, I young.
And may not young men die as well as old?
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katherine is to be married.
Now on the Sunday following shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu, good neighbor. Now I fear thee not.
Sirrah, young gamester, your father were a fool 
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy! 
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good.
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, called supposed Vincentio;
And that's a wonder. Fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
Fiddler, forbear, you grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?
The patroness of heavenly harmony.
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much. 
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordained! 
Was it not to refresh the mind of man 
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
I am no breeching scholar in the schools,
I'll not be tied to hours, nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles,
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never, tune your instrument.
"Hic ibat Simois; his est [Sigeia] tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis."
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Now let me see if I can conster it: 
Madam,'tis now in tune. All but the base.
The base is right,'tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides
Was Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master, else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt.
But let it rest. Now, Litio, to you:
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk, and give me leave a while; 
My lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal, sir?  Well, I must wait, 
And watch withal, for but I be deceived, 
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art,
To teach you gamouth in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade;
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamouth long ago.
Yet read the gamouth of Hortensio.
Gamouth, I am, the ground of all accord:
A re, to plead Hortensio's passion;
B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord,
C fa ut, that loves with all affection.
D sol re, one cliff, two notes have I,
E la mi, show pity, or I die."
Call you this gamouth?  Tut, I like it not.
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice
To [change] true rules for [odd] inventions. 
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books, 
And help to dress your sister's chamber up.
You know tomorrow is the wedding-day.
Farewell, sweet masters both, I must be gone.
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.
Methinks he looks as though he were in love;
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list. If once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day,
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. 
What will be said? What mockery will it be,
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends 
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? 
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine.  I must forsooth be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen,
Who wooed in haste, and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,;
And to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banes,
Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.
Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
And say,"Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!"
Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word.
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest. 
Would Katherine had never seen him though! 
Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of [thy] impatient humor.
Is it new and old too? how may that be?
Why, is it not news to [hear] of Petruchio's coming?
Is he come? Why, no, sir. What then?
He is coming. When will he be here?
When he stands where I am, and sees you there. 
'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean apparelled.
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
Why, sir, he comes not. Didst thou not say he comes?
Who? that Petruchio came? Ay, that Petruchio came.
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Why, that's all one. Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny, A horse and a man
Come, where be these gallants?  Who's at home?
You are welcome, sir.  And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.  Not so well apparelled 
Were it better I should rush in thus:
But where is Kate?  Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? -- Gentles, methinks you frown,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
And tell us what occasion of import
Hath all so long detained you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear --
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which at more leisure I will so excuse 
As you shall well be satisfied with all.
But where is Kate?  I stay too long from her. 
The morning wears,'tis time we were at church. 
See not your bride in these unreverent robes,
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me, thus I'll visit her.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words;
To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate, and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
I'll after him, and see the event of this.
But, sir, love concerneth us to add 
Her father's liking, which to bring to pass,
As before imparted to your worship, 
I am to get a man -- what e'er he be, 
It skills not much, we'll fit him to our turn --
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
Which once performed, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business.
We'll overreach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Litio,
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
As willingly as e'er I came from school. 
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home? 
A bridegroom, say you? 'tis a groom indeed, 
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
Curster than she? why,'tis impossible.
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
"Ay, by gogs-wouns," quoth he, and swore so loud,
That all amazed the priest let fall the book,
And as he stooped again to take it up,
This mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff 
That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
"Now take them up," quoth he,"if any list." 
What said the wench when he rose again? 
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamped and swore
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine.  "A health!" quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm, quaffed off the muscadel,
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly,
And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck,
And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo.
And I seeing this, came thence for very shame,
And after me I know the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains. 
I know you think to dine with me today, 
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
Is't possible you will away tonight?
I must away today, before night come.
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
I am content. Are you content to stay?
I am content you shall entreat me stay, 
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Now if you love me stay.  Grumio, my horse. 
Do what thou canst, I will not go today,
No, nor tomorrow -- not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir, there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself.
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
O Kate, content thee, prithee be not angry.
I will be angry; what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her.
Go to the feast, revel and domineer, 
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves; 
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me. 
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret,
I will be master of what is mine own.
She is my goods, my chattels, she is my house,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare,
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua.  Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate!
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
Of all mad matches never was the like.
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
That being mad herself, she's madly mated. 
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants 
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place,
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio.  Come, gentlemen, let's go.
Where be these knaves?  What, no man at door 
To hold my stirrup, nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip? 
You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms! 
What?  no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
You peasant swain, you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabr'el's pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel;
There was no link to color Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory; 
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly,
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you. 
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in. 
"Where is the life that late I led? Where are those" --
Sit down, Kate, and welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud!
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues!  You villains, when?
Out, you rogue, you pluck my foot awry.
Take that, and mend the plucking [off] the other.
Be merry, Kate.  Some water here; what ho!
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither;
Where are my slippers?  Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily. 
You whoreson villain, will you let it fall?
Patience, I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling. 
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!
Come, Kate, sit down, I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
What's this?  Mutton? Ay. Who brought it? I.
What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all.
You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves!
What, do you grumble?  I'll be with you straight.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet.
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away, 
And I expressly am forbid to touch it;
For it engenders choler, planteth anger, 
And better 'twere that both of us did fast, 
Since of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such overroasted flesh.
Be patient, tomorrow 't shall be mended,
And for this night we'll fast for company.
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new risen from a dream.
Away, away, for he is coming hither.
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully. 
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,
And till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged, 
For then she never looks upon her lure. 
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come, and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat today, nor none shall eat;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed,
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her,
And in conclusion, she shall watch all night,
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl,
And with the clamor keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humor.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak; 'tis charity to shew.
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
What, master, read you?  First resolve me that.
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
Quick proceeders, marry!  Now tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca
Loved [none] in the world so well as Lucentio.
O despiteful love, unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful.
Mistake no more, I am not Litio, 
Nor a musician, as I seem to be,
But one that scorn to live in this disguise 
For such a one as leaves a gentleman, 
And makes a god of such a cullion.
Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
See how they kiss and court!  Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her
As one unworthy all the former favors
That I have fondly flattered [her] withal.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Fie on her, see how beastly she doth court him!
Would all the world but he had quite for sworn! 
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow, 
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard. 
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio. 
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
Tranio, you jest, but have you both for sworn me?
Mistress, we have. Then we are rid of Litio.
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
God give him joy! Ay, and he'll tame her.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long, 
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
O master, master, I have watched so long
That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn. What is he, Biondello?
Master, a mercantant, or a pedant,
I know not what, but formal in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
If he be credulous, and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio.
Take [in] your love, and then let me alone.
God save you, sir! And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on or are you at the farthest?
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two, 
But then up farther, and as far as Rome,
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life. 
What countryman, I pray? Of Mantua.
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?
My life, sir? How, I pray? for that goes hard.
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua.  Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
Hath published and proclaimed it openly.
'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so,
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and must here deliver them.
This will I do, and this I will advise you.
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
Among them know you one Vincentio? 
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth. 
He is my father, sir, and sooth to say, 
In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favor will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir? So shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city.
If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This by the way I let you understand:
My father is here looked for every day,
To pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here. 
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you;
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
No, no, forsooth I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my father's door
Upon entreaty have a present alms, 
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
But I, who never knew how to entreat, 
Nor never needed that I should entreat, 
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed;
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness, or else present death.
I prithee go, and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
'Tis passing good, I prithee let me have it.
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
I like it well, good Grumio, fetch it me.
I cannot tell, I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Nay then I will not, you shall have the mustard, 
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
Then both or one, or any thing thou wilt. 
Why then the mustard without the beef. 
Go get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery!
How fares my Kate?  What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer? Faith, as cold as can be.
Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word?  Nay then, thou lov'st it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks, 
And so shall mine before you touch the meat.
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame. 
Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me. --
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love,
Will we return unto thy father's house,
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
With ruffs and cuffs, and fardingales, and things,
With scarfs and fans, and double change of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
What, hast thou dined?  The tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
Lay forth the gown. What news with you, sir?
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
Why, this was moulded on a porringer -- 
A velvet dish.  Fie, fie, 'tis lewd and filthy.
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell, 
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap. 
Away with it! come let me have a bigger.
I'll have no bigger, this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then. That will not be in haste.
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,
And speak I will.  I am no child, no babe;
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free,
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Why, thou say'st true, it is paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
Love me, or love me not, I like the cap,
And it I will have, or I will have none.
Thy gown? why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God, what masquing stuff is here? 
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like demi-cannon. 
What, up and down carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop.
I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.
Marry, and did; but if you be rememb'red,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir.
I'll none of it; hence, make your best of it.
I never saw a better fashioned gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
O monstrous arrogance!  Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! 
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou! 
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.
But how did you desire it should be made?
But did you not request to have it cut?
"With a small compassed cape" -- I confess the cape.
"With a trunk sleeve" -- I confess two sleeves.
"The sleeves curiously cut." Ay, there's the villainy.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
You are i' th' right, sir, 'tis for my mistress.
Go take it up unto thy master's use.
Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid. --
Go take it hence, be gone, and say no more.
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow,
Take no unkindness of his hasty words.
Away, I say, commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate, we will unto your father' s
Even in these honest mean habiliments; 
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich; 
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, 
So honor peereth in the meanest habit.
What, is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his feathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
If thou accountedst it shame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolic, we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go call my men, and let us straight to him,
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
Let's see, I think 'tis now some seven a' clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.
I dare assure you, sir,'tis almost two,
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.
Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone, 
I will not go today, and ere I do,
It shall be what a' clock I say it is. 
Why, so this gallant will command the sun.  
Ay, what else?  And but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista may remember me
Near twenty years ago in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
'Tis well, and hold your own in any case
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
I warrant you. But, sir, here comes your boy;
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
I told him that your father was at Venice, 
And that you looked for him this day in Padua. 
Th' art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista; set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.
I pray you stand good father to me now, 
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua 
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself;
And for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him matched; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
With one consent to have her so bestowed;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say --
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
And therefore if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him, 
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
Your son shall have my daughter with consent. 
I thank you, sir.  Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
There doth my father lie; and there this night
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here;
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
It likes me well.  Cambio, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And if you will, tell what hath happened:
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife. 
I pray the gods she may with all my heart! 
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone. 
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer.
Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
I follow you. Cambio! What say'st thou, Biondello?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you? 
I may and will, if she be so contented.
She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her;
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Come on a, God's name, once more toward our fathers.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
The moon! the sun -- it is not moonlight now.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house. --
Go on, and fetch our horses back again. --
Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
And if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
Nay then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
Then God be blest, it [is] the blessed sun, 
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind. 
What you will have it named, even that it is, 
And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
Well, forward, forward, thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But soft company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
'A will make the man mad, to make [a] woman of him. 
Young budding virgin, fair, and fresh, and sweet,
Whither away, or [where] is thy abode? 
Happy the parents of so fair a child! 
Happier the man whom favorable stars
Allots thee for his lovely bedfellow!
Why, how now, Kate, I hope thou art not mad.
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun,
That every thing I look on seemeth green;
Now I perceive thou art a reverent father.
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
Which way thou travellest -- if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
A  son of mine, which long I have not seen.
What is his name? Lucentio, gentle sir.
Happily met, the happier for thy son. 
And now by law, as well as reverent age, 
I may entitle thee my loving father.
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married.  Wonder not,
Nor be not grieved; she is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
Come go along and see the truth hereof
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she [be] froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward. 
Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house.
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
You shall not choose but drink before you go.
I think I shall command your welcome here;
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.
They're busy within, you were best knock louder. 
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate? 
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal. 
What if a man bring him a hundred pound
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved
Thou liest, his father is come from Padua
Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her. 
Come hither, you rogue.  What, have you forgot me?
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant? 
What am I, sir?  Nay, what are you, sir?
I charge you see that he be forthcoming. 
Stay, officer, he shall not go to prison. 
Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.
Swear if thou dar'st. Nay, I dare not swear it.
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio. 
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard, to the jail with him!
Pardon, dear father. How hast thou offended? 
Where is Lucentio? Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio,
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
Here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Love wrought these miracles.  Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town,
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.  
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.
Why then let's home again.  Come, sirrah, let's away.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love, stay.
Better once than never, for never too late.  
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree,
And time it is, when raging war is [done],
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
My banket is to close our stomachs up
After our great good cheer.  Pray you sit down,
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow. 
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
I mean Hortensio is afeard of you.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Roundly replied. Mistress, how mean you that?
Conceives by me! how likes Hortensio that?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
Very well mended.  Kiss him for that, good widow.
"He that is giddy thinks the world turns round":
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
A very mean meaning. Right, I mean you.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down. 
Spoke like an officer. Ha' to thee, lad!
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
Ay, but not frighted me, therefore I'll sleep again.
Nay, that you shall not, since you have begun;
Have at you for a [bitter] jest or two!
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,
This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
O, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound, 
Which runs himself, and catches for his master.
A good swift simile, but something currish. 
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself; 
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
O, O, Petruchio, Tranio hits you now.
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
'A has a little galled me, I confess;
And as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maimed you [two] outright.
Now in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Well, I say no; and therefore [for] assurance
And he whose wife is most obedient,
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
Content.  What's the wager? Twenty crowns.
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.
A hundred then.  Content. A match! 'tis done. 
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
That she is busy, and she cannot come.
How? she is busy, and she cannot come!
Is that an answer? Ay, and a kind one too.
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith. O ho, entreat her!
Nay then she must needs come. I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can,  yours will not be entreated. 
She says you have some goodly jest in hand. 
She will not come; she bids you come to her.
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vild,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina! 
What is your will, sir, that you send for me? 
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
And so it is; I wonder what it bodes.
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
An aweful rule, and right supremacy;
And to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy.
Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won, and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience, 
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes, and brings your froward wives 
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not;
Off with that bable, throw it under-foot.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
Fie, what a foolish duty call you this?
I would your duty were as foolish too.
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me [a] hundred crowns since supper-time.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Katherine, I charge thee tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
I say she shall, and first begin with her.
Fie, fie, unknit that threat'ning unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes, 
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor. 
It blots thy beauty, as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame, as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip, or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance; commits his body
To painful labor, both by sea and land;
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou li'st warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience --
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will, 
What is she but a foul contending rebel,
And graceless traitor to her loving lord? 
I am ashamed that women are so simple 
To offer war where they should kneel for peace,
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions, and our hearts,
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot;
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
Why, there's a wench!  Come on, and kiss me, Kate. 
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward. 
But a harsh hearing when women are froward. 
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white,
And being a winner, God give you good night!
Now go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
