"For shame," he cries, "let go, and let me go,
My day's delight is past, my horse is gone,
And 'tis your fault I am bereft him so.
I pray you hence, and leave me here alone, 
 For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,
 Is how to get my palfrey from the mare." 
 
Thus she replies: "Thy palfrey, as he should,
Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire;
Affection is a coal that must be cooled,
Else suffered it will set the heart on fire.
 The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none,
 Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.

"How like a jade he stood, tied to the tree,
Servilely mastered with a leathern rein!
But when he saw his love, his youth's fair fee,
He held such petty bondage in disdain,
 Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,
 Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.

"Who sees his true-love in her naked bed,
Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white,
But when his glutton eye so full hath fed,
His other agents aim at like delight?
 Who is so faint that dares not be so bold
 To touch the fire, the weather being cold? 

"Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy, 
And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee, 
To take advantage on presented joy;
Though I were dumb, yet his proceedings teach thee.
 O, learn to love, the lesson is but plain,
 And once made perfect, never lost again."

"I know not love," quoth he, "nor will not know it,
Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it;
'Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it;
My love to love is love but to disgrace it,
 For I have heard it is a life in death,
 That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.

"Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinished?
Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?
If springing things be any jot diminished,
They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth;
 The colt that's backed and burthened being young,
 Loseth his pride, and never waxeth strong.

"You hurt my hand with wringing, let us part, 
And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat;
Remove your siege from my unyielding heart, 
To love's alarms it will not ope the gate; 
 Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flatt'ry,
 For where a heart is hard they make no batt'ry."

"What, canst thou talk?" quoth she, "hast thou a tongue? 
O would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing!
Thy mermaid's voice hath done me double wrong; 
I had my load before, now pressed with bearing: 
 Melodious discord, heavenly tune harsh sounding,
 Ears' deep sweet music, and heart's deep sore wounding.

"Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love
That inward beauty and invisible,
Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move
Each part in me that were but sensible;
 Though neither eyes nor ears to hear nor see,
 Yet should I be in love by touching thee.

"Say that the sense of feeling were bereft me,
And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,
And nothing but the very smell were left me,
Yet would my love to thee be still as much,
 For from the stillitory of thy face excelling
 Comes breath perfumed, that breedeth love by smelling.

"But O, what banquet wert thou to the taste, 
Being nurse and feeder of the other four!
Would they not wish the feast might ever last, 
And bid Suspicion double-lock the door, 
 Lest Jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,
 Should by his stealing in disturb the feast?"

Once more the ruby-colored portal opened,
Which to his speech did honey passage yield,
Like a red morn, that ever yet betokened
Wrack to the seaman, tempest to the field,
 Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,
 Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.

This ill presage advisedly she marketh:
Even as the wind is hushed before it raineth,
Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh,
Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,
 Or like the deadly bullet of a gun,
 His meaning struck her ere his words begun.

And at his look she flatly falleth down,
For looks kill love, and love by looks reviveth:
A smile recures the wounding of a frown. 
But blessed bankrout that by love so thriveth!
 The silly boy, believing she is dead, 
 Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red; 

And all amazed, brake off his late intent,
For sharply he did think to reprehend her,
Which cunning Love did wittily prevent:
Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her!
 For on the grass she lies as she were slain,
 Till his breath breatheth life in her again.

He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,
He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,
He chafes her lips, a thousand ways he seeks
To mend the hurt that his unkindness marred,
 He kisses her, and she by her good will
 Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.

The night of sorrow now is turned to day:
Her two blue windows faintly she upheaveth,
Like the fair sun, when in his fresh array
He cheers the morn, and all the earth relieveth;
 And as the bright sun glorifies the sky, 
 So is her face illumined with her eye,

Whose beams upon his hairless face are fixed, 
As if from thence they borrowed all their shine. 
Were never four such lamps together mixed,
Had not his clouded with his brow's repine;
 But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light,
 Shone like the moon in water seen by night.

"O, where am I?" quoth she, "in earth or heaven,
Or in the ocean drenched, or in the fire?
What hour is this? or morn or weary even?
Do I delight to die, or life desire?
 But now I lived, and life was death's annoy,
 But now I died, and death was lively joy.

"O, thou didst kill me, kill me once again.
Thy eyes' shrowd tutor, that hard heart of thine,
Hath taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain
That they have murd'red this poor heart of mine,
 And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen,
 But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.

"Long may they kiss each other for this cure! 
O, never let their crimson liveries wear!
And as they last, their verdour still endure, 
To drive infection from the dangerous year! 
 That the star-gazers, having writ on death,
 May say, the plague is banished by thy breath.

"Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,
What bargains may I make, still to be sealing?
To sell myself I can be well contented,
So thou wilt buy, and pay, and use good dealing,
 Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips,
 Set thy seal manual on my wax-red lips.

"A thousand kisses buys my heart from me,
And pay them at thy leisure, one by one.
What is ten hundred touches unto thee?
Are they not quickly told, and quickly gone?
 Say for non-payment that the debt should double,
 Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?"

"Fair queen," quoth he, "if any love you owe me,
Measure my strangeness with my unripe years;
Before I know myself, seek not to know me, 
No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears;
 The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast, 
 Or being early plucked, is sour to taste. 

"Look the world's comforter with weary gait
His day's hot task hath ended in the west;
The owl (night's herald) shrieks, 'tis very late;
The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,
 And coal-black clouds that shadow heaven's light
 Do summon us to part, and bid good night.

"Now let me say 'Good night,' and so say you;
If you will say so, you shall have a kiss."
"Good night," quoth she, and ere he says "Adieu,"
The honey fee of parting tend'red is;
 Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace;
 Incorporate then they seem, face grows to face;

Till breathless he disjoined, and backward drew
The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth,
Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew,
Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth;
 He with her plenty pressed, she faint with dearth, 
 Their lips together glued, fall to the earth.
 
Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey, 
And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth;
Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey,
Paying what ransom the insulter willeth;
 Whose vultur thought doth pitch the price so high
 That she will draw his lips' rich treasure dry.

And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,
With blindfold fury she begins to forage;
Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil,
And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage,
 Planting oblivion, beating reason back,
 Forgetting shame's pure blush and honor's wrack.

Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,
Like a wild bird being tamed with too much handling,
Or as the fleet-foot roe that's tired with chasing,
Or like the froward infant stilled with dandling,
 He now obeys, and now no more resisteth,
 While she takes all she can, not all she listeth.
 
What wax so frozen but dissolves with temp'ring,
And yields at last to every light impression? 
Things out of hope are compassed oft with vent'ring, 
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission;
 Affection faints not like a pale-faced coward,
 But then woos best when most his choice is froward.

When he did frown, O had she then gave over,
Such nectar from his lips she had not sucked.
Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover;
What though the rose have prickles, yet 'tis plucked!
 Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
 Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last.

For pity now she can no more detain him;
The poor fool prays her that he may depart.
She is resolved no longer to restrain him,
Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,
 The which, by Cupid's bow she doth protest,
 He carries thence incaged in his breast.

"Sweet boy," she says, "this night I'll waste in sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch. 
Tell me, Love's master, shall we meet tomorrow?
Say, shall we, shall we? wilt thou make the match?" 
 He tells her no, tomorrow he intends 
 To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.

"The boar!" quoth she, whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek; she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoking arms she throws.
 She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,
 He on her belly falls, she on her back.

Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter;
All is imaginary she doth prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her,
 That worse than Tantalus' is her annoy,
 To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.

Even so poor birds, deceived with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw;
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw. 
 The warm effects which she in him finds missing
 She seeks to kindle with continual kissing. 
 
But all in vain, good queen, it will not be;
She hath assayed as much as may be proved.
Her pleading hath deserved a greater fee;
She's Love, she loves, and yet she is not loved.
 "Fie, fie," he says, "you crush me, let me go,
 You have no reason to withhold me so."

"Thou hadst been gone," quoth she, "sweet boy, ere this,
But that thou toldst me thou wouldst hunt the boar.
O, be advised, thou know'st not what it is
With javeling's point a churlish swine to gore,
 Whose tushes never sheathed he whetteth still,
 Like to a mortal butcher bent to kill.

"On his bow-back he hath a battle set
Of bristly pikes that ever threat his foes,
His eyes like glow-worms shine when he doth fret,
His snout digs sepulchres where e'er he goes;
 Being moved, he strikes, what e'er is in his way,
 And whom he strikes his crooked tushes slay. 

"His brawny sides, with hairy bristles armed, 
Are better proof than thy spear's point can enter; 
His short thick neck cannot be easily harmed;
Being ireful, on the lion he will venter.
 The thorny brambles and embracing bushes,
 As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes.

"Alas, he nought esteems that face of thine,
To which Love's eyes pays tributary gazes,
Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne,
Whose full perfection all the world amazes,
 But having thee at vantage (wondrous dread!)
 Would root these beauties as he roots the mead.

"O, let him keep his loathsome cabin still!
Beauty hath nought to do with such foul fiends.
Come not within his danger by thy will,
They that thrive well take counsel of their friends.
 When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble,
 I feared thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.

"Didst thou not mark my face? was it not white? 
Sawest thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?
Grew I not faint, and fell I not downright? 
Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie, 
 My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest,
 But like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.

"For where Love reigns, disturbing Jealousy
Doth call himself Affection's sentinel, 
Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny,
And in a peaceful hour doth cry, 'Kill, kill!' 
 Distemp'ring gentle Love in his desire, 
 As air and water do abate the fire.

"This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy,
This canker that eats up Love's tender spring,
This carry-tale, dissentious Jealousy,
That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring,
 Knocks at my heart, and whispers in mine ear,
 That if I love thee, I thy death should fear;

"And more than so, presenteth to mine eye
The picture of an angry chafing boar,
Under whose sharp fangs, on his back doth lie
An image like thyself, all stained with gore,
 Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed,
 Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.

"What should I do, seeing thee so indeed,
That tremble at th' imagination?
The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed,
And fear doth teach it divination: 
 I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow,
 If thou encounter with the boar tomorrow. 
 
"But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruled by me,
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
Or at the fox which lives by subtilty,
Or at the roe which no encounter dare;
 Pursue these fearful creatures o'er the downs,
 And on thy well-breathed horse keep with thy hounds.

"And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare,
Mark the poor wretch, to overshut his troubles,
How he outruns the wind, and with what care
He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles:
 The many musits through the which he goes
 Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.

"Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,
To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,
And sometime where earth-delving conies keep,
To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,
 And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer: 
 Danger deviseth shifts, wit waits on fear.
 
"For there his smell with others being mingled, 
The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,
Ceasing their clamorous cry till they have singled
With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;
 Then do they spend their mouths: echo replies,
 As if another chase were in the skies.

"By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill,
Stands on his hinder-legs with list'ning ear,
To hearken if his foes pursue him still.
Anon their loud alarums he doth her,
 And now his grief may be compared well
 To one sore sick that hears the passing bell.

"Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch
Turn, and return, indenting with the way;
Each envious brier his weary legs do scratch,
Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay,
 For misery is trodden on by many,
 And being low, never relieved by any.

"Lie quietly, and hear a little more, 
Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise.
To make thee hate the hunting of the boar, 
Unlike myself thou hear'st me moralize, 
 Applying this to that, and so to so,
 For love can comment upon every woe.

"Where did I leave?" "No matter where," quoth he,
"Leave me, and then the story aptly ends;
The night is spent." "Why, what of that?" quoth she.
"I am," quoth he, "expected of my friends,
 And now 'tis dark, and going I shall fall."
 "In night," quoth she, "desire sees best of all.

"But if thou fall, O then imagine this,
The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips,
And all is but to rob thee of a kiss.
Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips
 Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,
 Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.

"Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:
Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine,
Till forging Nature be condemned of treason, 
For stealing moulds from heaven that were divine,
 Wherein she framed thee, in high heaven's despite, 
 To shame the sun by day, and her by night. 

"And therefore hath she bribed the Destinies
To cross the curious workmanship of Nature,
To mingle beauty with infirmities,
And pure perfection with impure defeature,
 Making it subject to the tyranny
 Of mad mischances and much misery:

"As burning fevers, agues pale and faint,
Life-poisoning pestilence, and frenzies wood,
The marrow-eating sickness, whose attaint
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood;
 Surfeits, impostumes, grief, and damned despair
 Swear Nature's death for framing thee so fair.

"And not the least of all these maladies
But in one minute's fight brings beauty under;
Both favor, savor, hue, and qualities,
Whereat th' impartial gazer late did wonder,
 Are on the sudden wasted, thawed, and done, 
 As mountain snow melts with the midday sun.
 
"Therefore despite of fruitless chastity, 
Love-lacking vestals, and self-loving nuns,
That on the earth would breed a scarcity
And barren dearth of daughters and of sons,
 Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night
 Dries up his oil to lend the world his light.
