"What is thy body but a swallowing grave,
Seeming to bury that posterity
Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,
If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?
 If so, the world will hold thee in disdain,
 Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain.

"So in thyself thyself art made away,
A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife,
Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay,
Or butcher sire that reaves his son of life.
 Foul cank'ring rust the hidden treasure frets,
 But gold that's put to use more gold begets."
 
"Nay then," quoth Adon, "you will fall again
Into your idle over-handled theme. 
The kiss I gave you is bestowed in vain, 
And all in vain you strive against the stream,
 For by this black-faced night, desire's foul nurse,
 Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse.

"If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
And every tongue more moving than your own,
Bewitching like the wanton mermaids' songs,
Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown;
 For know my heart stands armed in mine ear,
 And will not let a false sound enter there,

"Lest the deceiving harmony should run
Into the quiet closure of my breast,
And then my little heart were quite undone,
In his bedchamber to be barred of rest.
 No, lady, no, my heart longs not to groan,
 But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.

"What have you urged that I cannot reprove?
The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger. 
I hate not love, but your device in love,
That lends embracements unto every stranger. 
 You do it for increase: O strange excuse! 
 When reason is the bawd to lust's abuse.

"Call it not love, for Love to heaven is fled,
Since sweating Lust on earth usurped his name,
Under whose simple semblance he hath fed
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;
 Which the hot tyrant stains, and soon bereaves,
 As caterpillars do the tender leaves.

"Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,
But Lust's effect is tempest after sun;
Love's gentle spring doth always fresh remain,
Lust's winter comes ere summer half be done;
 Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies;
 Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies.

"More I could tell, but more I dare not say,
The text is old, the orator too green,
Therefore in sadness, now I will away;
My face is full of shame, my heart of teen, 
 Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended,
 Do burn themselves for having so offended." 
 
With this he breaketh from the sweet embrace
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark laund runs apace,
Leaves Love upon her back, deeply distressed.
 Look how a bright star shooteth from the sky,
 So glides he in the night from Venus' eye,

Which after him she darts, as one on shore
Gazing upon a late embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend;
 So did the merciless and pitchy night
 Fold in the object that did feed her sight.

Whereat amazed as one that unaware
Hath dropped a precious jewel in the flood,
Or stonished as night-wand'rers often are,
Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood,
 Even so confounded in the dark she lay,
 Having lost the fair discovery of her way. 

And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans, 
That all the neighbor caves, as seeming troubled, 
Make verbal repetition of her moans;
Passion on passion deeply is redoubled;
 "Ay me!" she cries, and twenty times, "Woe, woe!"
 And twenty echoes twenty times cry so.

She marking them begins a wailing note,
And sings extemporally a woeful ditty,
How love makes young men thrall, and old men dote,
How love is wise in folly, foolish witty.
 Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe,
 And still the choir of echoes answer so.

Her song was tedious, and outwore the night,
For lovers' hours are long, though seeming short;
If pleased themselves, others they think delight
In such-like circumstance, with such-like sport.
 Their copious stories, oftentimes begun,
 End without audience, and are never done.

For who hath she to spend the night withal, 
But idle sounds resembling parasits,
Like shrill-tongued tapsters answering every call, 
Soothing the humor of fantastic wits? 
 She says," 'Tis so," they answer all," 'Tis so,"
 And would say after her, if she said "No."

Lo here the gentle lark, weary of rest,
From his moist cabinet mounts up on high,
And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast
The sun ariseth in his majesty,
 Who doth the world so gloriously behold
 That cedar tops and hills seem burnished gold.

Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow:
"O thou clear god, and patron of all light,
From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow
The beauteous influence that makes him bright,
 There lives a son that sucked an earthly mother,
 May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other."

This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove,
Musing the morning is so much o'erworn,
And yet she hears no tidings of her love. 
She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn;
 Anon she hears them chaunt it lustily, 
 And all in haste she coasteth to the cry. 

And as she runs, the bushes in the way,
Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,
Some twined about her thigh to make her stay.
She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace,
 Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache,
 Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake.

By this she hears the hounds are at a bay,
Whereat she starts like one that spies an adder 
Wreathed up in fatal folds just in his way,
The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder; 
 Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds 
 Appalls her senses, and her spirit confounds.

For now she knows it is no gentle chase,
But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,
Because the cry remaineth in one place,
Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud;
 Finding their enemy to be so curst,
 They all strain court'sy who shall cope him first.

This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,
Through which it enters to surprise her heart,
Who overcome by doubt, and bloodless fear,
With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part:
 Like soldiers when their captain once doth yield,
 They basely fly, and dare not stay the field.

Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy,
Till cheering up her senses all dismayed,
She tells them 'tis a causeless fantasy,
And childish error that they are afraid; 
 Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more --
 And with that word, she spied the hunted boar, 
 
Whose frothy mouth bepainted all with red,
Like milk and blood being mingled both together,
A second fear through all her sinews spread,
Which madly hurries her she knows not whither;
 This way she runs, and now she will no further,
 But back retires to rate the boar for murther.

A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways,
She treads the path that she untreads again;
Her more than haste is mated with delays,
Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,
 Full of respects, yet nought at all respecting,
 In hand with all things, nought at all effecting.

Here kennelled in a brake she finds a hound,
And asks the weary caitiff for his master,
And there another licking of his wound,
'Gainst venomed sores the only sovereign plaster,
 And here she meets another sadly scowling,
 To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling. 

When he hath ceased his ill-resounding noise, 
Another flap-mouthed mourner, black and grim, 
Against the welkin volleys out his voice;
Another, and another, answer him,
 Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,
 Shaking their scratched ears, bleeding as they go.

Look how the world's poor people are amazed
At apparitions, signs, and prodigies,
Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gazed,
Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;
 So she at these sad signs draws up her breath,
 And sighing it again, exclaims on Death.

"Hard-favored tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean,
Hateful divorce of love" -- thus chides she Death --
"Grim-grinning ghost, earth's worm, what dost thou mean
To stifle beauty, and to steal his breath?
 Who when he lived, his breath and beauty set
 Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet.
 
"If he be dead -- O no, it cannot be,
Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it: 
O yes, it may, thou hast no eyes to see, 
But hatefully at randon dost thou hit.
 Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart
 Mistakes that aim, and cleaves an infant's heart.

"Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,
And hearing him, thy power had lost his power.
The Destinies will curse thee for this stroke:
They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluck'st a flower.
 Love's golden arrow at him should have fled,
 And not Death's ebon dart to strike him dead.

"Dost thou drink tears, that thou provok'st such weeping?
What may a heavy groan advantage thee?
Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping
Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?
 Now Nature cares not for thy mortal vigor,
 Since her best work is ruined with thy rigor."

Here overcome, as one full of despair, 
She vailed her eyelids, who like sluices stopped
The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair 
In the sweet channel of her bosom dropped; 
 But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain,
 And with his strong course opens them again.

O how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow!
Her eye seen in the tears, tears in her eye,
Both crystals, where they viewed each other's sorrow,
Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry,;
 But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
 Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again.

Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving who should best become her grief;
All entertained, each passion labors so,
That every present sorrow seemeth chief,
 But none is best; then join they all together,
 Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.

By this, far off, she hears some huntsman hallow;
A nurse's song ne'er pleased her babe so well.
The dire imagination she did follow 
This sound of hope doth labor to expel,
 For now reviving joy bids her rejoice, 
 And flatters her it is Adonis' voice. 

Whereat her tears began to turn their tide,
Being prisoned in her eye, like pearls in glass,
Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,
Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass
 To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,
 Who is but drunken when she seemeth drowned.

O hard-believing love, how strange it seems!
Not to believe and yet too credulous:
Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes;
Despair and hope makes thee ridiculous:
 The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,
 In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.

Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought,
Adonis lives, and Death is not to blame;
It was not she that called him all to naught;
Now she adds honors to his hateful name:
 She clepes him king of graves, and grave for kings, 
 Imperious supreme of all mortal things.
 
"No, no," quoth she, "sweet Death, I did but jest, 
Yet pardon me, I felt a kind of fear
When as I met the boar, that bloody beast,
Which knows no pity, but is still severe;
 Then, gentle shadow (truth I must confess),
 I railed on thee, fearing my love's decesse.

"'Tis not my fault, the boar provoked my tongue,
Be wreaked on him, invisible commander;
'Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong,
I did but act, he's author of thy slander.
 Grief hath two tongues, and never woman yet
 Could rule them both without ten women's wit."

Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,
Her rash suspect she doth extenuate,
And that his beauty may the better thrive,
With Death she humbly doth insinuate;
 Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs, and stories
 His victories, his triumphs, and his glories.
 
"O Jove," quoth she, "how much a fool was I,
To be of such a weak and silly mind, 
To wail his death who lives, and must not die 
Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind!
 For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,
 And beauty dead, black chaos comes again.

"Fie, fie, fond love, thou art as full of fear
As one with treasure laden, hemmed with thieves;
Trifles, unwitnessed with eye or ear,
Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves."
 Even at this word she hears a merry horn,
 Whereat she leaps, that was but late forlorn.

As falcons to the lure, away she flies,
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light,
And in her haste unfortunately spies
The foul boar's conquest on her fair delight,
 Which seen, her eyes [as] murd'red with the view,
 Like stars ashamed of day, themselves withdrew;

Or as the snail, whose tender horns being hit,
Shrinks backward in his shelly cave with pain,
And there, all smoth'red up, in shade doth sit, 
Long after fearing to creep forth again;
 So at his bloody view her eyes are fled 
 Into the deep-dark cabins of her head, 

Where they resign their office, and their light,
To the disposing of her troubled brain,
Who bids them still consort with ugly night,
And never wound the heart with looks again,
 Who like a king perplexed in his throne,
 By their suggestion, gives a deadly groan.

Whereat each tributary subject quakes,
As when the wind imprisoned in the ground,
Struggling for passage, earth's foundation shakes,
Which with cold terror doth men's minds confound.
 This mutiny each part doth so surprise
 That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes,

And being opened, threw unwilling light
Upon the wide wound that the boar had trenched
In his soft flank, whose wonted lily white
With purple tears, that his wound wept, [was] drenched. 
 No flow'r was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf, or weed,
 But stole his blood, and seemed with him to bleed. 
 
This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth,
Over one shoulder doth she hang her head;
Dumbly she passions, franticly she doteth,
She thinks he could not die, he is not dead;
 Her voice is stopped, her joints forget to bow,
 Her eyes are mad that they have wept till now.

Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,
That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three,
And then she reprehends her mangling eye,
That makes more gashes where no breach should be.
 His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled,
 For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.

"My tongue cannot express my grief for one,
And yet," quoth she, "behold two Adons dead!
My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,
Mine eyes are turned to fire, my heart to lead:
 Heavy heart's lead, melt at mine eyes' red fire,
 So shall I die by drops of hot desire. 

"Alas, poor world, what treasure hast thou lost! 
What face remains alive that's worth the viewing? 
Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast
Of things long since, or any thing ensuing?
 The flowers are sweet, their colors fresh and trim,
 But true sweet beauty lived and died with him.

"Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear!
Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you:
Having no fair to lose, you need not fear,
The sun doth scorn you, and the wind doth hiss you.
 But when Adonis lived, sun and sharp air
 Lurked like two thieves, to rob him of his fair.

"And therefore would he put his bonnet on,
Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep;
The wind would blow it off, and being gone,
Play with his locks; then would Adonis weep;
 And straight, in pity of his tender years,
 They both would strive who first should dry his tears.
 
"To see his face the lion walked along
Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him; 
To recreate himself when he hath song, 
The tiger would be tame, and gently hear him;
 If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey,
 And never fright the silly lamb that day.

"When he beheld his shadow in the brook, 
The fishes spread on it their golden gills;
When he was by, the birds such pleasure took, 
That some would sing, some other in their bills 
 Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries:
 He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.

"But this foul, grim, and urchin-snouted boar,
Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave,
Ne'er saw the beauteous livery that he wore --
Witness the entertainment that he gave.
 If he did see his face, why then I know
 He thought to kiss him, and hath killed him so.

"'Tis true, 'tis true, thus was Adonis slain:
He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear,
Who did not whet his teeth at him again,
But by a kiss thought to persuade him there;
 And nousling in his flank, the loving swine
 Sheathed unaware the tusk in his soft groin.

"Had I been toothed like him, I must confess,
With kissing him I should have killed him first,
But he is dead, and never did he bless
My youth with his, the more am I accursed." 
 With this she falleth in the place she stood,
 And stains her face with his congealed blood. 
 
She looks upon his lips, and they are pale,
She takes him by the hand, and that is cold,
She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,
As if they heard the woeful words she told;
 She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,
 Where lo, two lamps burnt out in darkness lies;

Two glasses, where herself herself beheld
A thousand times, and now no more reflect,
Their virtue lost, wherein they late excelled,
And every beauty robbed of his effect.
 "Wonder of time," quoth she, "this is my spite,
 That thou being dead, the day should yet be light.

"Since thou art dead, lo here I prophesy,
Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend;
It shall be waited on with jealousy,
Find sweet beginning, but unsavory end;
 Ne'er settled equally, but high or low,
 That all love's pleasure shall not match his woe. 

"It shall be fickle, false, and full of fraud, 
Bud, and be blasted, in a breathing while, 
The bottom poison, and the top o'erstrawed
With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile;
 The strongest body shall it make most weak,
 Strike the wise dumb, and teach the fool to speak.

"It shall be spring, and too full of riot,
Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures;
The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,
Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures;
 It shall be raging mad, and silly mild,
 Make the young old, the old become a child.

"It shall suspect where is no cause of fear,
It shall not fear where it should most mistrust,
It shall be merciful, and too severe,
And most deceiving when it seems most just;
 Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward,
 Put fear to valor, courage to the coward.

"It shall be cause of war and dire events, 
And set dissension 'twixt the son and sire,
Subject and servile to all discontents, 
As dry combustious matter is to fire. 
 Sith in his prime, Death doth my love destroy,
 They that love best, their loves shall not enjoy."

By this the boy that by her side lay killed
Was melted like a vapor from her sight,
And in his blood that on the ground lay spilled,
A purple flow'r sprung up, check'red with white,
 Resembling well his pale cheeks and the blood
 Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.

She bows her head, the new-sprung flow'r to smell,
Comparing it to her Adonis' breath,
And says within her bosom it shall dwell,
Since he himself is reft from her by death.
 She crops the stalk, and in the breach appears
 Green-dropping sap, which she compares to tears.

"Poor flow'r," quoth she, "this was thy father's guise --
Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire -- 
For every little grief to wet his eyes;
To grow unto himself was his desire, 
 And so 'tis thine, but know it is as good 
 To wither in my breast as in his blood.

"Here was thy father's bed, here in my breast;
Thou art the next of blood, and 'tis thy right.
Lo in this hollow cradle take thy rest,
My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night;
 There shall not be one minute in an hour
 Wherein I will not kiss my sweet love's flow'r."

Thus weary of the world, away she hies,
And yokes her silver doves, by whose swift aid
Their mistress mounted through the empty skies,
In her light chariot, quickly is conveyed,
 Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen
 Means to immure herself, and not be seen.