<TIMvs> He is gone happy, and has left me rich.
Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those talents,
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.  O,  by no means,
Honest Ventidius. You mistake my love;
I gave it freely ever, and there's none
Can truly say he gives if he receives. 
To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair. 
Ceremony was but devised at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
Pray sit, more welcome are ye to my fortunes
Ho, ho, confessed it?  Hanged it, have you  not?
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.  No;
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Fie, th' art a churl.  Ye have got a humor there
Does not become a man, 'tis much to blame.
Let him have a table by himself, 
For he does neither affect company,
Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
My lord, in heart; and let the health go round. 
Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which ne'er left man i' th' mire.
This and my food are equals, there's no odds;
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus! 
My heart is ever at your service, my lord. 
Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
And at that instant like a babe sprung up.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
That of his bounties taste!  The five best senses
Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
To gratulate thy plenteous bosom. There,
Taste, touch, all, pleased from thy table rise;
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
They're welcome all, let 'em have kind admittance.
You see, my lord, how ample y' are beloved. 
What a sweep of vanity comes this way!
Like madness is the glory of this life,
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves,
And spend our flatteries to drink those men
Upon whose age we void it up again
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
I should fear those that dance before me now
Would one day stamp upon me.  'T'as been done;
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful and kind;
You have added worth unto't and lustre,
And entertained me with mine own device.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Most thankfully, my lord.  Flavius!
My lord?   The little casket bring me hither.
Else I should tell him well (i' faith, I should), 
When all's spent, he'ld be crossed then, and he could.
'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind, 
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind. 
Our horses!  O my friends! I have one word
To say to you. Look you, my good lord,
I must entreat you honor me so much
I am so far already in your gifts --
My lord, there are certain nobles of the Senate
Newly alighted, and come to visit you. 
They are fairly welcome.   I beseech your honor, 
Vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near. 
Near? why then another time I'll hear thee.
May it please your honor, Lord Lucius
(Out of his free love) hath presented to you
I shall accept them fairly; let the presents
Be worthily entertained.   How now? what news?
I'll hunt with him, and let them be received, 
Not without fair reward.  What will this come to? 
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts, 
Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
To show him what a beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state
That what he speaks is all in debt: he owes
For ev'ry word.  He is so kind that he now
Pays interest for't; his land's put to their books.
I would I were gently put out of office
Happier is he that has no friend to feed
Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my lord.   You do yourselves
Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits.
Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
And now I remember, my lord, you gave 
Good words the other day of a bay courser
I rode on. 'Tis yours, because you liked it. 
O, I beseech you pardon me, my lord, in that.
You may take my word, my lord; I know no man
Can justly praise but what he does affect.
I weigh my friend's affection with mine own.
I take all and your several visitations
So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give;
Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,
Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich,
It comes in charity to thee; for all thy living
Is'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
We are so virtuously bound -- And so
Am I to you.  So infinitely endeared -- 
Honor, and fortunes keep with you, Lord Timon! 
Ready for his friends.   What a coil's here!
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
That are given for'em. Friendship's full of dregs;
Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtsies.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen,
Is't possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart, 
It turns in less than two nights?  O you gods!
I feel my master's passion. This slave 
Unto his honor has my lord's meat in him; 
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment
O, may diseases only work upon't!
Which my lord paid for, be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!         
I know his lordship is but merry with me;
He cannot want fifty -- five hundred talents.
But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.     
Do you observe this, Hostilius?  Ay, too well.
Is every flatterer's sport. Who can call him
His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in
My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,
Supported his estate, nay, Timon's money
Has Paid his men their wages.  He ne'er drinks
But Timon's silver treads upon his lip, 
And yet -- O, see the monstrousness of man
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape! -- 
He does deny him (in respect of his) 
What charitable men afford to beggars.
Religion groans at it.  For mine own part,
I never tasted Timon in my life,
Nor came any of his bounties over me
To mark me for his friend; yet, I protest,
For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into donation,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart.  But I perceive
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
They have all been touched and found base metal,
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him,
And does he send to me?  Three? Humh! 
It shows but little love or judgment in him. 
H'as much disgraced me in't, I'm angry at him,
But his occasions might have wooed me first;
For, in my conscience, I was the first man
And does he think so backwardly of me now,
So it may prove an argument of laughter
To th' rest, and 'mongst lords [I] be thought a fool.
I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
H'ad sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
I'd such a courage to do him good.  But now return,
And with their faint reply this answer join:
Who bates mine honor shall not know my coin. 
Excellent! your lordship's a goodly villain.
This was my lord's best hope, now all are fled,
Many a bounteous year, must be employed
And this is all a liberal course allows:
Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
Well met, good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.
The like to you, kind Varro.  Lucius! 
What, do we meet together?  Ay, and I think
One business does command us all; for mine
So much? Is not my lord seen yet?   Not yet.
I wonder on't, he was wont to shine at seven.
Ay, but the days are waxed shorter with him. 
You must consider that a prodigal course 
Is like the sun's, but not like his recoverable,
That is, one may reach deep enough and yet 
Find little.   I am of your fear for that.
I'll show you how t' observe a strange event.
Your lord sends now for money.   Most true, he does.
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
Timon in this should pay more than he owes;
And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels
I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness.
I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
'Tis much deep, and it should  seem by th' sum
Your master's confidence was above mine,
We wait for certain money here, sir.   Ay, 
If money were as certain as your waiting,
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills 
When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts,
And take down th' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up,
Believe't, my lord and I have made an end:
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
If'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you,
Many do keep their chambers are not sick;
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the gods.   Good gods!
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive enemy? my jail?
The place which I have feasted, does it now 
(Like all mankind) show me an iron heart?
Put in now, Titus.  My lord, here is my bill. 
Here's mine. And mine, my lord.  And ours, my lord.
Knock me down with'em, cleave me to the girdle!  
Five thousand drops pays that. What yours? and yours?
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon  you!  
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.
So fitly?  Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius -- all.
You only speak from your distracted soul;
There's not so much left to furnish out
A moderate table.    Be it not in thy care;
Of knaves once more; my cook and I'll provide.
My lord, you have my voice to't; the fault's
Bloody; 'tis necessary he should die.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Honor, health, and compassion to the Senate!  
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
For pity is the virtue of the law,
And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
Upon a friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath stepped into the law, which is past depth
To those that (without heed) do plunge into't.
He is a man (setting his fate aside)
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice 
([An] honor in him which buys out his fault),
But with a noble fury and fair spirit, 
Seeing his reputation touched to death, 
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behoove his anger, ere 'twas spent,
As if he had but proved an argument.
You undergo too strict a paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair.
Your words have took such pains as if they labored
Upon the head of valor; which indeed
When sects and factions were newly born.
He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
My lord -- You cannot make gross sins look clear; 
To revenge is no valor, but to bear.
My lords, then, under favor, pardon me 
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
And not endure all threats? sleep upon't,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats
Without repugnancy?  If there be
Such valor in the bearing, what make we 
Abroad? Why then, women are more valiant
That stay at home, if bearing carry it; 
And the ass more captain than the lion, the fellow 
Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
If wisdom be in suffering.  O my lords,
As you are great, be pitifully good.
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust,
But in defense, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety;
You breathe in vain.   In vain?  His service done
At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
Were a sufficient briber for his life.
Why, [I] say, my lords, h'as done fair service,
And slain in fight many of your enemies.
How full of valor did he bear himself
In the last conflict, and made Plenteous wounds!
He's a sworn rioter; he has a sin that often
Drowns him and takes his valor Prisoner. 
If there were no foes, that were enough 
To overcome him. In that beastly fury
He has been known to commit outrages
And cherish factions.  'Tis inferred to us,
His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
He dies.  Hard fate! he might have died in war.
My lords, if not for any parts in him --
Though his right arm might purchase his own time
And be in debt to none -- yet more to move you,
Take my deserts to his, and join'em both;
And for I know your reverend ages love
Security, I'll pawn my victories, all
My honor to you, upon his good returns.
If by this crime he owes the law his life,
Why, let the war receive't in valiant gore,
For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
We are for law, he dies, urge it no more
On height of our displeasure.  Friend, or brother,
He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Must it be so?  It must not be.  My lords, 
I cannot think but your age has forgot me,
It could not else be I should prove so base
To sue and be denied such common grace.
My wounds ache at you.   Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:
We banish thee for ever.  Banish me?
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
If after two days' shine Athens contain thee,   
He shall be executed presently.      
Only in bone, that none may look on you!
I'm worse than mad.  I have kept back their foes, 
While they have told their money, and let out
Their coin upon large interest -- I myself 
Rich only in large hurts. All those, for this? 
Is this the balsom that the usuring Senate
Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!
It comes not ill; I hate not to be banished,
It is a cause worthy my sPleen and fury,
That I may strike at Athens.  I'll cheer up
My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.
'Tis honor with most lands to be at odds;
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.  
May you a better feast never behold,
You knot of mouth-friends!  Smoke and lukewarm water 
Is your perfection.  This is Timon's last,
Who, stuck and spangled [with your] flatteries, 
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces 
Your reeking villainy.  Live loathed, and long,
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,
Cap-and-knee slaves, vapors, and minute-jacks!
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?
Soft, take thy physic first -- thou too -- and thou;
Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? all in motion?  Henceforth be no feast
Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn house! sink Athens! henceforth hated be
Of Timon man and all humanity!           
Lord Timon's mad.  I feel't upon my bones.
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.    
Let me look back upon thee.  O thou wall
That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth, 
And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience, fail in children!  Slaves and fools, 
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the bench, 
And minister in their steads!  To general filths
Convert o' th' instant, green virginity!
Do't in your parents' eyes!  Bankrupts, hold fast;
Rather than render back, out with your knives,
And cut your trusters' throats! Bound servants, steal;
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed,
Thy mistress is o' th' brothel! [Son] of sixteen,
Pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire,
With it beat out his brains!  Piety, and fear,
Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth, 
Domestic awe, night-rest, and neighborhood,
Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades, 
Degrees, observances, customs, and laws, 
Decline to your confounding contraries;
And yet confusion live! Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious fevers heap
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
That'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
And drown themselves in riot!  Itches, blains,
Sow all th' Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general leprosy!  Areath, infect breath,
That their society (as their friendship) may
Be merely poison!  Nothing I'll bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable town!
Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
Th' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
The gods confound (hear me, you good gods all)
Th' Athenians both within and out that wall!
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow 
To the whole race of mankind, high and low!
And past.  Your steward puts me off, my lord,
And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on,
How goes the world, that I am thus encount'red
With clamorous demands of debt, broken bonds,
And the detention of long since due debts,
Against my honor?    Please you, gentlemen,
The time is unagreeable to this business. 
Your importunacy cease till after dinner, 
That I may make his lordship understand
Do so, my friends. See them well entertained.
Apemantus, let's ha' some sport with'em.
I have not seen you long, how goes the world? 
It wears, sir, as it grows. Ay, that's well known;
But what Particular rarity?  What strange,
Which manifold record not matches? See,
Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power
Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.
I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
O, 'tis a worthy lord.    Nay, that's most fixed.
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were, 
To an untirable and continuate goodness;
O, Pray let's see't. For the Lord Timon, sir?
If he will touch the estimate.  But for that --
"When we for recompense have praised the vild,
It stains the glory in that happy verse
Which aptly sings the good."   'Tis a good form. 
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication 
To the great lord.   A thing slipped idlely from me.
From whence 'tis nourished.  The fire i' th' flint
Shows not till it be strook; our gentle flame
Provokes itself and like the current flies
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
So 'tis. This comes off well and excellent.
Indifferent.   Admirable!  How this grace
Speaks his own standing! What a mental power
This eye shoots forth! How big imagination
Moves in this lip! To th' dumbness of the gesture
It is a pretty mocking of the life.
Here is a touch; is't good?  I will say of it, 
It tutors nature. Artificial strife
Lives in these touches, livelier than life. 
The senators of Athens, happy men!
I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment.  My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moves itself
In a wide sea of wax; no levelled malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an eagle flight, bold, and forth on,
You see how all conditions, how all minds,
As well of glib and slipp'ry creatures as
Of grave and austere quality, tender down 
Their services to Lord Timon. His large fortune,
Upon his good and gracious nature hanging, 
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance 
All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loves better
Than to abhor himself; even he drops down
The knee before him, and returns in Peace
Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o' th' mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures,
That labor on the bosom of this sphere
To propagate their states. Amongst them all,
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Translates his rivals.  'Tis conceived to scope.
This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy mount 
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our condition.    Nay, sir, but hear me on: 
All those which were his fellows but of late --
Some better than his value -- on the moment
Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
Drink the free air.  Ay, marry, what of these?
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants
Which labored after him to the mountain's top
Even on their knees and [hands], let him [slip] down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.
A thousand moral paintings I can show
More pregnantly than words.  Yet you do well
To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
Ay, my good lord, five talents is his debt,
His means most short, his creditors most strait.
Your honorable letter he desires
I am not of that feather to shake off
My friend when he must need me. I do know him
A gentleman that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. I'll pay the debt and free him.
Commend me to him. I will send his ransom,
And being enfranchised, bid him come to me;
'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after. Fare you well.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.    Freely, good father.
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
Most noble Timon,  call the man before thee.
Attends he here, or no?  Lucilius!
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
By night frequents my house.  I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an heir more raised
Than one which holds a trencher.  Well; what further?
One only daughter have I, no kin else,
On whom I may confer what I have got.
The maid is fair, a' th' youngest for a bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love. I prithee, noble lord, 
Join with me to forbid him her resort,
Myself have spoke in vain.    The man is honest. 
His honesty rewards him in itself,
It must not bear my daughter.   Does she love him?
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
What levity's in youth. Love you the maid?
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
If in her marriage my consent be missing,
I call the gods to witness, I will choose
Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,
If she be mated with an equal husband?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long;
To build his fortune I will strain a little,
For 'tis a bond in men.  Give him thy daughter; 
What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
And make him weigh with her.   Most noble lord, 
Pawn me to this your honor, she is his.
My hand to thee, mine honor on my promise.
Humbly I thank your lordship. Never may
That state or fortune fall into my keeping,
Vouchsafe my labor, and long live your lord ship!
I thank you, you shall hear from me anon.
Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
A piece of painting, which I do beseech
Your lordship to accept.  Painting is welcome.
The painting is almost the natural man;
For since dishonor traffics with man's nature,
He is but outside; these pencilled figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it.  Wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.  The gods preserve ye!
Well fare you, gentleman; give me your hand.
We must needs dine together. -- Sir, your jewel 
A mere saciety of commendations;
If I should pay you for't as 'tis extolled,
It would unclew me quite.  My lord, 'tis rated
As those which sell would give; but you well know,
Things of like value differing in the owners 
Are prized by their masters. Believe't, dear lord,
You mend the jewel by the wearing it. 
No, my good lord, he speaks the common tongue
We'll bear, with your lordship. He'll spare none.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow --
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them knaves?  thou know'st them not.
Thou know'st I do, I called thee by thy name.
That I had no angry wit to be a lord. 
Art not thou a merchant?  Ay, Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
If traflic do it, the gods do it.
Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound thee!
'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
Pray entertain them, give them guide to us.
You must needs dine with me; go not you hence
Till I have thanked you. When dinner's done,
Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.  Right welcome, sir!
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
In different pleasures.  Pray you let us in.
What time a' day is't, Apemantus?
The most accursed thou, that still omit'st it.
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
Ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools.
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice. 
And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoes
He pours it out: Plutus, the god of gold,
Is but his steward. No meed but he repays
Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
All use of quittance.  The noblest mind he carries
Long may he live in fortunes!  Shall we in? 
And late, five thousand; to Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste?  It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
If I would sell my horse and buy twenty moe
Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon,
Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me straight
And able horses. No porter at his gate,
But rather one that smiles and still invites
All that pass by.  It cannot hold, no reason
Can sound his state in safety. Caphis ho!
Caphis, I say!   Here, sir, what is your pleasure?
Get on your cloak and haste you to Lord Timon;
Importune him for my moneys, be not ceased
With slight denial; nor then silenced when
"Commend me to your master" and the cap
Plays in the right hand, thus -- but tell him
My uses cry to me; I must serve my turn
Out of mine own. His days and times are past,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit. I love and honor him,
But must not break my back to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone,
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand; for I do fear,
When every feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a phoenix.  Get you gone. 
Ay, go, sir; take the bonds along with you, 
And have the dates in. Come!  I will, sir.  Go.  
No care, no stop, so senseless of expense,
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of riot.  Takes no accompt
How things go from him, nor [resumes] no care
Of what is to continue.  Never mind
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done, he will not hear, till feel.
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie! Good even, Varro.  What,
You come for money?  Is't not your business too? 
It is; and yours too, Isidore?  It is so.
Would we were all discharged!  I fear it.
So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,
My Alcibiades. -- With me, what is your will?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Dues? Whence are you?    Of Athens here, my lord.
Please it your lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month.
My master is awaked by great occasion
To call upon his own, and humbly prays you
That with your other noble parts you'll suit
In giving him his right. Mine honest friend,
I prithee but repair to me next morning. 
Nay, good my lord -- Contain thyself, good friend.
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants --
Pray you walk near, I'll speak with you anon.  
You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.  You would not hear me;
At many leisures I [proposed].   Go to!
Perchance some single vantages you took,
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse yourself.  O my good lord,
At many times I brought in my accompts,
Laid them before you; you would throw them off,
And say you [found] them in mine honesty.
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head, and wept; 
Yea, 'gainst th' authority of manners, prayed you
To hold your hand more close.  I did endure 
Not seldom, nor no slight checks, when I have 
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
Though you hear now (too late), yet now's a time:
The greatest of your having lacks a half
'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone,
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues.  The future comes apace;
What shall defend the interim? and at length
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
O my good lord, the world is but a word;
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone!   You tell me true.
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
Call me before th' exactest auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
When all our offices have been oppressed 
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room 
Hath blazed with lights and brayed with minstrelsy, 
I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
And set mine eyes at flow.   Prithee no more.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
This night englutted!  Who is not Timon's?
Great Timon! noble, worthy, royal Timon!
Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
The breath is gone whereof this praise is made.
Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter show'rs,
These flies are couched.  Come, sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet hath passed my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack
To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart;
If I would broach the vessels of my love, 
And try the argument of hearts, by borrowing,
Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use 
And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,  
That I account them blessings; for by these
Shall I try friends. You shall perceive how you
Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.
Within there! [Flaminius!] Servilius!
Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
Deserved this hearing -- bid'em send o' th' instant
A thousand talents to me.    I have been bold
(For that I knew it the most general way)
To them to use your signet and your name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.   Is't true? Can't be?
They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
Do what they would, are sorry; you are honorable,
But yet they could have wished -- they know not --
Something hath been amiss -- a noble nature
May catch a wrench -- would all were well -- 'tis pity --
And so, intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks, and these hard fractions,
With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods, 
They froze me into silence.   You gods, reward them! 
Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows 
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;
'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventidius. (Prithee be not sad,
Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak,
No blame belongs to thee.) Ventidius lately
Buried his father, by whose death he's stepped
Into a great estate. When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,
I cleared him with five talents.  Greet him from me,
Bid him suppose some good necessity
Touches his friend, which craves to be rememb'red
With those five talents. That had, give't these fellows
To whom 'tis instant due.  Nev'r speak or think
That Timon's fortunes'mong his friends can sink.
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.      
Hear you, Master Steward, where's our master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
I am as poor as you.  Such a house broke?
So noble a master fall'n, all gone, and not
One friend to take his fortune by the arm,
From our companion thrown into his grave,
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self,
A dedicated beggar to the air, 
With his disease of all-shunned poverty,
Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows. 
All broken implements of a ruined house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery,
That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow. Leaked is our bark,
And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
Hearing the surges threat; we must all part
Into this sea of air.  Good fellows all,
The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
Where ever we shall meet, for Timon's sake
Let's yet be fellows.  Let's shake our heads, and say,
As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
"We have seen better days."  Let each take some;
Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us! 
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since riches point to misery and contempt? 
Who would be so mocked with glory, or to live 
To have his pomp, and all what state compounds,
Aut only painted, like his varnished friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
Undone by goodness!  Strange, unusual blood,
When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, do still mar men.
My dearest lord, blest to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord,
He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat
Of monstrous friends; nor has he with him to
Supply his life, or that which can command it.
I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;
Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.  
O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth 
Rotten humidity; below thy sister's orb
Infect the air! Twinned brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth
Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser.  Not nature
(To whom all sores lay siege) can bear great fortune
Raise me this beggar, and deny't that lord,
It is the paster lards the brother's sides,
The want that makes him [lean].  Who dares? who dares
In purity of manhood stand upright
And say,"This man's a flatterer"?  If one be,
So are they all; for every grize of fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool.  All's obliquy;
There's nothing level in our cursed natures
But direct villainy.  Therefore be abhorred 
All feasts, societies, and throngs of men!
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains; 
Destruction fang mankind!  Earth, yield me roots! 
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant poison!  What is here?
Gold?  Yellow, glittering, precious gold?
No, gods, I am no idle votarist;
Roots, you clear heavens! Thus much of this will make
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads.
Will knit and break religions, bless th' accursed,
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves,
And give them title, knee, and approbation
With senators on the bench. This is it
That makes the wappened widow wed again;
She, whom the spittle-house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices 
To th' April day again. Come, damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that puts odds 
Among the rout of nations, I will make thee 
Do thy right nature.   Ha? a drum?  Th' art quick,    
Aut yet I'll bury thee; thou't go, strong thief,
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,   
For showing me again the eyes of man!
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
That I might love thee something.  I know thee well;
But in thy fortunes am unlearned and strange. 
I know thee too, and more than that I know thee 
I not desire to know.  Follow thy drum, 
With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules.
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
Then what should war be?  This fell whore of thine
Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
For all her cherubin look.  Thy lips rot off!
I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns
How came the noble Timon to this change?
As the moon does, by wanting light to give:
But then renew I could not, like the moon;
There were no suns to borrow of.   Noble Timon,
What friendship may I do thee?  None, but to
Maintain my opinion.  What is it, Timon?
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries. 
Thou saw'st them, when I had prosperity. 
I see them now, then was a blessed time.
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Is this th' Athenian minion, whom the world
Voiced so regardfully?   Art thou Timandra?
Be a whore still. They love thee not that use thee;
Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves
For tubs and baths, bring down rose-cheeked youth
To the [tub-]fast and the diet.   Hang thee, monster!
Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his calamities.
I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof doth daily make revolt
In my penurious band.  I have heard, and grieved,
How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth, 
Forgetting thy great deeds when neighbor states,
But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them -- 
I prithee beat thy drum and get thee gone. 
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
I had rather be alone.   Why, fare thee well;
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap --
The gods confound them all in thy conquest,
And thee after, when thou hast conquered!
Why me, Timon?   That by killing of villains
Thou wast born to conquer my country.
Put up thy gold. Go on -- here's gold -- go on;
Be as a planetary plague when Jove
Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
In the sick air. Let not thy sword skip one.
Pity not honored age for his white beard, 
It is her habit only that is honest, 
Herself's a bawd.  Let not the virgin's cheek 
Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk paps,
That through the window[-bars] bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;   
Think it a bastard, whom the oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against objects,
Put armor on thine ears and on thine eyes,
Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding, 
Shall pierce a jot. There's gold to pay thy soldiers,
Make large confusion; and thy fury spent, 
Confounded be thyself!  Speak not, be gone. 
Hast thou gold yet?  I'll take the gold thou givest me,                         
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!
Give us some gold, good Timon; hast thou more?
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
And to make whores, a bawd.  Hold up, you sluts,
Your aprons mountant. You are not oathable,
Although I know you'll swear, terribly swear
Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
Th' immortal gods that hear you. Spare your oaths;
I'll trust to your conditions, be whores still.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up,
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turncoats; yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary. And thatch your poor thin roofs
With burthens of the dead -- some that were hanged, 
No matter; wear them, betray with them.  Whore still, 
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face: 
A pox of wrinkles!  Well, more gold -- what then?
Believe't that we'll do any thing for gold.
In hollow bones of man, strike their sharp shins,
And mar men's spurring.  Crack the lawyer's voice,
That he may never more false title plead,
Nor sound his quillets shrilly; hoar the flamen,
That [scolds] against the quality of flesh
And not believes himself.  Down with the nose,
Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away
Of him that, his particular to foresee,
And let the unscarred braggarts of the war
Derive some pain from you.  Plague all,
That your activity may defeat and quell
The source of all erection. There's more gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon. 
Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon!
If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
Yes, thou spok'st well of me.   Call'st thou that harm?
Men daily find it.  Get thee away, and take
Thy beagles with thee. We but offend him.  Strike!
That nature being sick of man's unkindness
Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou
Whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast
Teems and feeds all; whose self-same mettle,
Whereof thy proud child (arrogant man) is puffed,
Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
The gilded newt and eyeless venomed worm, 
With all th' abhorred births below crisp heaven
Whereon Hyperion's quick'ning fire doth shine: 
Yield him who all the human sons do hate, 
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,
Let it no more bring out ingrateful man!
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears,
Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the marbled mansion all above
Never presented! -- O, a root, dear thanks! --
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leafs,
Whereof ingrateful man, with liquorish draughts
And morsels unctious, greases his pure mind,
That from it all consideration slips --
I was directed hither. Men report
Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.
'Tis then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee!
This is in thee a nature but infected, 
A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
From change of future. Why this spade? this place? 
This slave-like habit? and these looks of care? 
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee; hinge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou'lt observe
Blow off thy cap; Praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus;
Thou gav'st thine ears (like tapsters that bade welcome)
To knaves and all approachers.  'Tis most just
That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,
Rascals should have't. Do not assume my likeness.
Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself,                         
A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
Will put thy shirt on warm?  Will these moist trees,
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels 
And skip when thou point'st out?  Will the cold brook, 
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste 
To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
Whose naked natures live in all the spite
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements exposed,
Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee.
O, thou shalt find -- A fool of thee. Depart.
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
I hate thee worse.   Why?  Thou flatter'st misery.
I flatter not, but say thou art a caitiff.
Always a villain's office, or a fool's.
Dost please thyself in't?  Ay.  What, a knave too?
If thou didst put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well; but thou 
Dost it enforcedly. Thou'dst courtier be again,
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery 
Outlives incertain pomp, is crowned before: 
This one is filling still, never complete;
The other, at high wish. Best state, contentless,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being
Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm
With favor never clasped, but bred a dog.
Hadst thou like us from our first swath proceeded
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely [command], thou wouldst have plunged thyself
In general riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of lust, and never learned
The icy precepts of respect, but followed
The sug'red game before thee. But myself,
Who had the world as my confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men
At duty, more than I could frame employment;
That numberless upon me stuck as leaves 
Do on the oak, have with one winter's brash
Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare, 
For every storm that blows -- I to bear this, 
That never knew but better, is some burthen:
Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time
Hath made thee hard in't.  Why shouldst thou hate men?
They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse, thy father (that poor rag)
Must-be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
To some she-beggar and compounded thee
Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone!
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
Ay, that I am not thee.   I, that I was
No prodigal. I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
That the whole life of Athens were in this!
Thus would I eat it. Here, I will mend thy feast.
First mend [my] company, take away thyself. 
So I shall mend mine own, by th' lack of thine.   
'Tis not well mended so, it is but botched;
Thee thither in a whirlwind.  If thou wilt,
Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.
Here is no use for gold.  The best, and truest;
For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
A plague on thee, thou art too bad to curse!
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.
I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
Choler does kill me that thou art alive;
Would thou wouldst burst!  Away, thou tedious rogue!
I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.
Beast!  Slave!  Toad!  Rogue, rogue, rogue!
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
But even the mere necessities upon't.
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;
Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
Thy grave-stone daily; make thine epitaph,
That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
'Twixt natural [son] and [sire]! thou bright defiler
Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
Thou ever young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
That lies on Dian's lap! thou visible god,
That sold'rest close impossibilities,
And mak'st them kiss! that speak'st with every tongue
To every purpose!  O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
May have the world in empire!   Would 'twere so!
But not till I am dead.  I'll say th' hast gold; 
Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.  Thronged to?  Ay.
Thy back, I prithee.   Live, and love thy misery.
Long live so, and so die.  I am quit.
Moe things like men! eat, Timon, and abhor [them].   
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.           
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;
Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;
The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet heps;
The bounteous huswife Nature on each bush
Lays her full mess before you. Want? why want?
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds and fishes;
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
That you are thieves professed, that you work not
In holier shapes; for there is boundless theft 
In limited professions.  Rascal thieves,
Here's gold.  Go, suck the subtle blood o' th' grape, 
Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth, 
And so scape hanging.  Trust not the physician,
His antidotes are poison, and he slays
Moe than you rob. Take wealth and lives together,
Do, [villains,] do, since you Protest to do't.
Like workmen, I'll example you with thievery:
The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea; the moon's an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun;
The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The moon into salt tears; the earth's a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n
From gen'ral excrement; each thing's a thief.
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Has unchecked theft.  Love not yourselves, away,
Rob one another. There's more gold.  Cut throats,
All that you meet are thieves. To Athens go,
Break open shops; nothing can you steal
But thieves do lose it. Steal less for this I give you,
And gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.
Where he abides. What's to be thought of him?
Does the rumor hold for true that he's
[Phrynia] and [Timandra] had gold of him.
He likewise enriched poor straggling soldiers with
Great quantity.  'Tis said he gave unto
Has been but a try for his friends?   Nothing else. 
With the highest.  Therefore, 'tis not amiss 
We tender our loves to him in this supposed 
Distress of his; it will show honestly in us,
And is very likely to load our purposes
With what they travail for, if it be
A just and true report that goes of his having.
What have you now to present unto him?
Nothing at this time but my visitation;
Only I will promise him an excellent piece.
Promising is the very air o' th' time;
It opens the eyes of expectation.
Performance is ever the duller for his act,
And but in the plainer and simpler kind of people
The deed of saying is quite out of use.
To promise is most courtly and fashionable;
Performance is a kind of will or testament
Which argues a great sickness in his judgment
Excellent workman! thou canst not paint a man 
So bad as is thyself.  I am thinking
What I shall say I have provided for him.
It must be a personating of himself;
A satire against the softness of prosperity,
With a discovery of the infinite flatteries
Wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men?
Do so, I have gold for thee.  Nay, let's seek him:
Then do we sin against our own estate,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.
When the day serves, before black-cornered night,
Find what thou want'st by free and offered light.
I'll meet you at the turn.  What a god's gold
That he is worshipped in a baser temple 
'Tis thou that rig'st the bark and Plough'st the foam, 
Settlest admired reverence in a slave. 
To thee be [worship], and thy saints for aye
Be crowned with plagues, that thee alone obey!
Hail, worthy Timon!  Our late noble master!
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
Having often of your open bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
Whose thankless natures (O abhorred spirits!)
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough --
Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being! I am rapt and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
Let it go naked, men may see't the better.
You that are honest, by being what you are
Make them best seen and known.   He and myself 
Have travailed in the great show'r of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.   Ay, you are honest [men]. 
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
Can you eat roots and drink cold water? No?
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
Y' are honest men; y' have heard that I have gold,
I am sure you have.  Speak truth, y' are honest men.
So it is said, my noble lord, but therefore
Good honest men!  Thou draw'st a counterfeit
Best in all Athens; th' art indeed the best,
Thou counterfeit'st most lively.  So, so, my lord.
E'en so, sir, as I say. -- And, for thy fiction,
Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
That thou art even natural in thine art.
But for all this, my honest-natured friends,
I must needs say you have a little fault;
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I 
You take much pains to mend.   Beseech your honor 
To make it known to us.   You'll take it ill.
Most thankfully, my lord.   Will you indeed?
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave
That mightily deceives you.  Do we, my lord?
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom; yet remain assured
Look you, I love you well, I'll give you gold,
Rid me these villains from your companies;
Hang them, or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
You that way and you this; but two in company;
Each man apart, all single and alone, 
Yet an arch-villain keeps him company. 
If where thou art, two villains shall not be,
Come not near him.   If thou wouldst not reside   
But where one villain is, then him abandon. --
Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves.
You have work for me; there's payment, hence!
You are an alcumist, make gold of that.
It is vain that you would speak with Timon;
For he is set so only to himself,
That nothing but himself which looks like man
Is friendly with him.   Bring us to his cave.
It is our part and promise to th' Athenians 
To speak with Timon.    At all times alike 
Men are not still the same; 'twas time and griefs 
That framed him thus. Time with his fairer hand,
Offering the fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him.  Bring us to him,
And [chance] it as it may.   Here is his cave.
Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon,
Look out and speak to friends. Th' Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee.
Thou sun that comforts, burn! Speak and be hanged.
For each true word, a blister, and each false
Be as a cantherizing to the root o' th' tongue,
Consuming it with speaking!   Worthy Timon --
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
I thank them, and would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.  O, forget 
What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The senators with one consent of love
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special dignities, which vacant lie,
For thy best use and wearing. They confess
Toward thee forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public body, which doth seldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itself
A lack of Timon's aid, hath [sense] withal
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,
Together with a recompense more fruitful
Than their offense can weigh down by the dram;
Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs,
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Ever to read them thine. You witch me in it;
Surprise me to the very brink of tears. 
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators. 
Therefore so please thee to return with us, 
And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Of Alcibiades th' approaches wild,
Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
His country's peace. And shakes his threat'ning sword
Against the walls of Athens.    Therefore, Timon --
Well, sir, I will; therefore I will, sir, thus:
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not.  But if he sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by th' beards,
Giving our holy virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
In pity of our aged and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not, 
And let him take't at worst -- for their knives care not,
While you have throats to answer.  For myself, 
There's not a whittle in th' unruly camp 
But I do prize it at my love before
The [reverend'st] throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous gods,
As thieves to keepers.   Stay not, all's in vain.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph;
It will be seen tomorrow.  My long sickness
Of health and living now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still;
Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
And last so long enough!   We speak in vain.
But yet I love my country, and am not
One that rejoices in the common wrack,
As common bruit doth put it.  That's well spoke.
Commend me to my loving countrymen --
These words become your lips as they pass thorough them.                          
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
In their applauding gates.  Commend me to them, 
And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
I like this well, he will return again.
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree,
From high to low throughout, that whoso please
To stop affliction, let him take his haste,
Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,
And hang himself.  I pray you do my greeting.
Trouble him no further, thus you still shall find him.
Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion 
Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
Who once a day with his embossed froth 
The turbulent surge shall cover; thither come, 
And let my grave-stone be your oracle.
Lips, let four words go by and language end!
What is amiss, plague and infection mend!
Graves only be men's works, and death their gain!
Sun, hide thy beams, Timon hath done his reign.
His discontents are unremovably
Our hope in him is dead.  Let us return,
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril. It requires swift foot.    
Thou hast painfully discovered; are his files
As full as thy report?  I have spoke the least.
Besides, his expedition promises 
We stand much hazard if they bring not Timon.
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend,
Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force,
And made us speak like friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timon's cave
With letters of entreaty, which imported
His fellowship i' th' cause against your city,
In part for his sake moved.  Here come our brothers.
No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.
The enemy's drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the air with dust.  In, and prepare:
Ours is the fall, I fear, our foes the snare.  
By all description this should be the place. 
Who's here?  Speak ho!  No answer?  What is this?
"Timon is dead, who hath outstretched his  span: 
Some beast read this; there does not live a man."
Dead, sure, and this his grave.  What's on this tomb
I cannot read; the character I'll take with wax;
Our captain hath in every figure skill,
An aged interpreter, though young in days.
Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.      
Sound to this coward and lascivious town
Till now you have gone on and filled the time
With all licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of justice; till now myself and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our traversed arms, and breathed 
Our sufferance vainly.  Now the time is flush,
When crouching marrow in the bearer strong 
Cries (of itself) "No more!" Now breathless wrong 
Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
And pursy insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight. Noble and young --
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee to give thy rages balm,
To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
Above their quantity.   So did we woo
Transformed Timon to our city's love
By humble message and by promised means.
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.   These walls of ours
Were not erected by their hands from whom
You have received your grief; nor are they such
That these great tow'rs, trophies, and schools should fall                         
For private faults in them.  Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out; 
Shame, that they wanted cunning in excess, 
Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
Into our city with thy banners spread;
By decimation, and a tithed death,
If thy revenges hunger for that food
Which nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth,
And by the hazard of the spotted die
Let die the spotted.   All have not offended;
For those that were, it is not square to take
On those that are, revenge; crimes, like lands,
Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage;
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended; like a shepherd,
Approach the fold and cull th' infected forth,
But kill not all together.    What thou wilt,
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
Than hew to't with thy sword.   Set but thy foot
Against our rampired gates and they shall ope, 
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before, 
To say thou't enter friendly.  Throw thy glove,
Or any token of thine honor else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
And not as our confusion, all thy powers
Shall make their harbor in our town till we
Have sealed thy full desire.   Then there's my glove;
[Descend,] and open your uncharged ports.
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
Fall, and no more; and to atone your fears
With my more noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
But shall be remedied to your public laws
At heaviest answer.  'Tis most nobly spoken.
My noble general, Timon is dead, 
Entombed upon the very hem o' th' sea,
And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which
With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,
Scorn'dst our brains' flow, and those our droplets which
From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven.  Dead
Is noble Timon, of whose memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your city, 
And I will use the olive with my sword:
Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each 
Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
Full of decay and failing?  O monument
And wonder of good deeds evilly bestowed!
What vilder thing upon the earth than friends,
Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
When man was wished to love his enemies!
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me than those that do!
H'as caught me in his eye, I will present
My honest grief unto him; and as my lord, 
Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!
Away! what art thou?  Have you forgot me, sir? 
Why dost ask that?  I have forgot all men.
I never had honest man about me, all
I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
Nev'r did poor steward wear a truer grief
For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I love thee,
Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st
Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
But thorough lust and laughter.  Pity's sleeping:
Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,
T' accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts
To entertain me as your steward still. 
So true, so just, and now so comfortable? 
It almost turns my dangerous nature wild. 
Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
You perpetual-sober gods!  I do proclaim
One honest man -- mistake me not, but one;
How fain would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem'st thyself.  But all, save thee,
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Thou mightst have sooner got another service;
For many so arrive at second masters,
Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true
(For I must ever doubt though ne'er so sure),
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
Expecting in return twenty for one?
No, my most worthy master, in whose breast
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late; 
You should have feared false times when you did feast:
Suspect still comes where an estate is least. 
That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love, 
Duty,  and zeal to your unmatched mind,
Care of your food and living; and believe it,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope or present, I'd exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me by making rich yourself.
Look thee, 'tis so. Thou singly honest man,
Here, take; the gods out of my misery
Has sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: thou shalt build from men;
Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
But let the famished flesh slide from the bone
Ere thou relieve the beggar.  Give to dogs
What thou deniest to men.  Let prisons swallow'em,
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
And so farewell and thrive.  O, let me stay,
And comfort you, my master. If thou hat'st curses,
Stay not; fly, whilst thou art blest and free. 
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee. 
