<TNKSHvs> 
New plays and maidenheads are near akin --
Much followed both, for both much money gi'n,
If they stand sound and well; and a good play
(Whose modest scenes blush on his marriage-day,
And shake to lose his honor) is like her
That after holy tie and first night's stir,
Yet still is modesty, and still retains
More of the maid to sight than husband's pains.
We pray our play may be so; for I am sure
It has a noble breeder and a pure,
A learned, and a poet never went
More famous yet 'twixt Po and silver Trent. 
Chaucer (of all admired) the story gives;
There constant to eternity it lives. 
If we let fall the nobleness of this, 
And the first sound this child hear be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man,
And make him cry from under ground, "O, fan
From me the witless chaff of such a writer
That blasts my bays and my famed works makes lighter 
Than Robin Hood! "This is the fear we bring;
For to say truth, it were an endless thing,
And too ambitious, to aspire to him,
Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim
In this deep water. Do but you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall tack about
And something do to save us. You shall hear
Scenes, though below his art, may yet appear
Worth two hours' travail. To his bones sweet sleep!
Content to you! If this play do not keep
A little dull time from us, we perceive
Our losses fall so thick we must needs leave.
What woman I may stead that is distressed
What's your request? Deliver you for all.
We are three queens, whose sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured
The beaks of ravens, talents of the kites,
And pecks of crows in the foul fields of Thebes.
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urn their ashes, nor to take th' offense
Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye 
Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain lords. O, pity, Duke, 
Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared sword 
That does good turns to th' world; give us the bones
Of our dead kings, that we may chapel them;
And of thy boundless goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof,
Save this which is the lion's, and the bear's,
And vault to every thing! Pray you kneel not;
I was transported with your speech, and suffered
Your knees to wrong themselves. I have heard the fortunes
Of your dread lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance and revenge for 'em.
King Capaneus was your lord. The day
That he should marry you, at such a season
As now it is with me, I met your groom
By Mars's altar. You were that time fair;
Not Juno's mantle fairer than your tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreath
Was then nor threshed nor blasted; Fortune at you 
Dimpled her cheek with smiles. Hercules our kinsman
(Then weaker than your eyes) laid by his club; 
He tumbled down upon his [Nemean] hide, 
And swore his sinews thawed. O grief and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour!
Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,
Whereto he'll infuse pow'r, and press you forth
Our undertaker.  O, no knees, none, widow!
Unto the helmeted Bellona use them,
And pray for me your soldier. Troubled I am. 
Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain
The scythe-tusked boar; that with thy arm, as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy sex captive, but that this thy lord,
Born to uphold creation in that honor
First Nature styled it in, shrunk thee into
The bound thou wast o'erflowing, at once subduing
Thy force and thy affection; soldieress
That equally canst poise sternness with pity, 
Whom now I know hast much more power on him
Than ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength, 
And his love too, who is a servant for 
The tenor of [thy] speech; dear glass of ladies,
Bid him that we, whom flaming war doth scorch,
Under the shadow of his sword may cool us;
Require him he advance it o'er our heads;
Speak't in a woman's key -- like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Than a dove's motion when the head's plucked off;
Tell him, if he i' th' blood-sized field lay swoll'n,
Showing the sun his teeth, grinning at the moon,
What you would do. Poor lady, say no more:
I had as lief trace this good action with you
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing way. My lord is taken
Heart-deep with your distress. Let him consider.
I'll speak anon. O, my petition was 
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied 
Melts into drops; so sorrow wanting form
Is pressed with deeper matter. Pray stand up, 
Your grief is written in your cheek. O, woe,
You cannot read it there. There, through my tears,
Like wrinkled pebbles in a [glassy] stream,
You may behold' em. Lady, lady, alack!
He that will all the treasure know o' th' earth
Must know the centre too; he that will fish
For my least minnow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O, pardon me,
Extremity, that sharpens sundry wits,
Pray you say nothing, pray you.
Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in 't,
Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were
The ground-piece of some painter, I would buy you
T' instruct me, 'gainst a capital grief indeed --
Such heart-pierced demonstration! but alas,
Being a natural sister of our sex,
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me
That it shall make a counter-reflect 'gainst 
My brother's heart, and warm it to some pity,
Though it were made of stone. Pray have good comfort. 
Forward to th' temple. Leave not out a jot
Will long last and be more costly than
Your suppliants' war! Remember that your fame
Knolls in the ear o' th' world; what you do quickly
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more
Than others' labored meditance; your premeditating
More than their actions. But, O Jove, your actions,
Soon as they [move,] as asprays do the fish,
Subdue before they touch. Think, dear Duke, think
What beds our slain kings have! What griefs our beds
That our dear lords have none! None fit for th' dead:
Those that with cords, knives, drams, precipitance,
Weary of this world's light, have to themselves
Been death's most horrid agents, humane grace
Affords them dust and shadow. But our lords 
Lie blist'ring 'fore the visitating sun,
And were good kings when living.
It is true; and I will give you comfort
To give your dead lords graves; the which to do
Must make some work with Creon.
And that work presents itself to th' doing: 
Now 'twill take form, the heats are gone to-morrow.
Then, bootless toil must recompense itself 
With its own sweat; now he's secure, 
Not dreams we stand before your puissance
Wrinching our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear. Now you may take him
Drunk with his victory. And his army full
Of bread and sloth. Artesius, that best knowest
How to draw out, fit to this enterprise,
The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business, forth and levy
Our worthiest instruments, whilst we dispatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
Of fate in wedlock. Dowagers, take hands,
Let us be widows to our woes; delay
Commends us to a famishing hope. Farewell.
We come unseasonably; but when could grief 
Cull forth, as unpanged judgment can, fitt'st time
For best solicitation?  Why, good ladies, 
This is a service, whereto I am going,
Greater than any [war]; it more imports me
Than all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope. The more proclaiming
Our suit shall be neglected. When her arms,
Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall
By warranting moonlight corslet thee -- O, when
Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think
Of rotten kings or blubbered queens? what care
For what thou feel'st not? what thou feel'st being able
To make Mars spurn his drum. O, if thou couch
But one night with her, every hour in't will
Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shalt remember nothing more than what
That banket bids thee to! Though much unlike
You should be so transported, as much sorry
I should be such a suitor; yet I think 
Did I not by th' abstaining of my joy,
Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit 
That craves a present med'cine, I should pluck 
All ladies' scandal on me. Therefore, sir, 
As I shall here make trial of my pray'rs,
Either Presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for aye their vigor dumb,
Prorogue this business we are going about, and hang
Your shield afore your heart, about that neck
Which is my fee, and which I freely lend
To do these poor queens service. O, help now!
Our cause cries for your knee. If you grant not
My sister her petition, in that force,
With that celerity and nature, which
She makes it in, from henceforth I'll not dare
To ask you any thing, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a husband. Pray stand up. 
I am entreating of myself to do
That which you kneel to have me. Pirithous,
Lead on the bride; get you and pray the gods 
For success and return; omit not any thing
In the pretended celebration. Queens, 
Follow your soldier.  As before, hence you,
And at the banks of [Aulis] meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moi'ty of a number for a business
More bigger-looked. Since that our theme is haste,
I stamp this kiss upon thy currant lip.
Sweet, keep it as my token. Set you forward,
Farewell, my beauteous sister. Pirithous,
Keep the feast full, bate not an hour on't. Sir,
I'll follow you at heels; the feast's solemnity
Shall want till your return. Cousin, I charge you
Boudge not from Athens. We shall be returning
Ere you can end this feast, of which I pray you
Make no abatement. Once more, farewell all.
Thus dost thou still make good The tongue o' th' world.
And earn'st a deity Equal with Mars. 
Thou being but mortal makest affections bend
To godlike honors; they themselves, some say,
Groan under such a mast'ry. As we are men
Thus should we do, being sensually subdued
We lose our human title. Good cheer, ladies.
Now turn we towards your comforts.
Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood,
And our prime cousin, yet unhard'ned in
The crimes of nature -- let us leave the city
Thebes, and the temptings in't, before we further
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in incontinence; for not to swim 
I' th' aid o' th' current were almost to sink,
At least to frustrate striving, and to follow 
The common stream, 'twould bring us to an eddy 
Where we should turn or drown; if labor through,
Our gain but life and weakness. Your advice
Is cried up with example. What strange ruins,
Since first we went to school, may we perceive
Walking in Thebes! scars and bare weeds
The gain o' th' martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends honor and golden ingots,
Which though he won, he had not; and now flurted
By peace, for whom he fought, who then shall offer
To Mars's so scorned altar? I do bleed
When such I meet, and wish great Juno would
Resume her ancient fit of jealousy
To get the soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her charitable heart, now hard, and harsher
Than strife or war could be. Are you not out?
Meet you no ruin but the soldier in
The cranks and turns of Thebes? You did begin 
As if you met decays of many kinds.
Perceive you none that do arouse your pity 
But th' unconsidered soldier? Yes, I pity
Decays where e'er I find them, but such most
That sweating in an honorable toil
Are paid with ice to cool' em. 'Tis not this
I did begin to speak of. This is virtue
Of no respect in Thebes. I spake of Thebes,
How dangerous, if we will keep our honors,
It is for our residing; where every evil
Hath a good color; where ev'ry seeming good's
A certain evil; where not to be ev'n jump
As they are, here were to be strangers, and
Such things to be, mere monsters. 'Tis in our power
(Unless we fear that apes can tutor's) to
Be masters of our manners. What need I
Affect another's gait, which is not catching
Where there is faith? or to be fond upon
Another's way of speech, when by mine own
I may be reasonably conceived; saved too, 
Speaking it truly? Why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him 
Follows his tailor, haply so long until 
The followed make pursuit? Or let me know
Why mine own barber is unblest, with him
My poor chin too, for 'tis not scissored just
To such a favorite's glass? What canon is there
That does command my rapier from my hip,
To dangle't in my hand, or to go tiptoe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The forehorse in the team, or I am none
That draw i' th' sequent trace. These poor slight sores
Need not a plantin; that which rips my bosom
Almost to th' heart's -- Our uncle Creon. He,
A most unbounded tyrant, whose successes
Makes heaven unfeared, and villainy assured
Beyond its power there's nothing; almost puts
Faith in a fever, and deifies alone
Voluble chance; who only attributes
The faculties of other instruments
To his own nerves and act; commands men service, 
And what they win in't, boot and glory; [one]
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not. Let 
The blood of mine that's sib to him be sucked 
From me with leeches! let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption! Clear-spirited cousin,
Let's leave his court, that we may nothing share
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile, or disobedient -- not his kinsmen
In blood unless in quality. Nothing truer.
I think the echoes of his shames have deafed
The ears of heav'nly justice. Widows' cries
Descend again into their throats, and have not
Due audience of the gods. Valerius!
The King calls for you; yet be leaden-footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phoebus, when
He broke his whipstock and exclaimed against
The horses of the sun, but whispered, to 
The loudness of his fury. Small winds shake him. 
Theseus (who where he threats appalls) hath sent 
Deadly defiance to him, and pronounces
Ruin to Thebes; who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath. Let him approach.
But that we fear the gods in him, he brings not
A jot of terror to us. Yet what man
Thirds his own worth (the case is each of ours),
When that his action's dregged with mind assured
'Tis bad he goes about. Leave that unreasoned.
Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon.
Yet to be neutral to him were dishonor;
Rebellious to oppose; therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our fate,
Who hath bounded our last minute. So we must.
Is't said this war's afoot? or it shall be,
On fail of some condition?  'Tis in motion,
The intelligence of state came in the instant 
With the defier. Let's to the King, who were he
A quarter carrier of that honor which
His enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase. But alas,
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall o' th' stroke do damage? Let th' event,
That never-erring arbitrator, tell us
When we know all ourselves, and let us follow
To our great lord, of whose success I dare not
Make any timorous question; yet I wish him 
Excess and overflow of power, and't might be, 
To dure ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him,
Store never hurts good governors. Though I know
His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there. My precious maid,
Those best affections that the heavens infuse
In their best-tempered pieces, keep enthroned
In your dear heart! Thanks, sir. Remember me
To our all-royal brother, for whose speed
The great Bellona I'll solicit; and
Since in our terrene state petitions are not
Without gifts understood, I'll offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes. Our hearts
Are in his army, in his tent. In's bosom.
We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep
When our friends don their helms, or put to sea,
Or tell of babes broached on the lance, or women
That have sod their infants in (and after eat them) 
The brine they wept at killing 'em. Then if
You stay to see of us such spinsters, we 
Should hold you here for ever. Peace be to you
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
Beyond further requiring. How his longing
Follows his friend: since his depart, his sports,
Though craving seriousness and skill, passed slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing o'er business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal
To these so diff'ring twins. Have you observed him
Since our great lord departed? With much labor;
And I did love him for't. They two have cabined
In many as dangerous as poor a comer,
Peril and want contending, they have skiffed
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
I' th' least of these was dreadful, and they have
Fought out together where death's self was lodged;
Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love 
Tied, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning, 
May be outworn, never undone. I think 
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,
Cleaving his conscience into twain and doing
Each side like justice, which he loves best. Doubtless
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you. I was acquainted
Once with a time when I enjoyed a playfellow;
You were at wars when she the grave enriched,
Who made too proud the bed, took leave o' th' moon
(Which then looked pale at parting) when our count
Was each aleven. 'Twas [Flavina]. Yes.
You talk of Pirithous' and Theseus' love:
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasoned,
More buckled with strong judgment, and their needs
The one of th' other may be said to water
Their intertangled roots of love, but I
And she (I sigh and spoke of) were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the elements 
That know not what nor why, yet do effect
Rare issues by their operance, our souls 
Did so to one another. What she liked 
Was then of me approved, what not, condemned,
No more arraignment. The flow'r that I would pluck
And put between my breasts (O then but beginning
To swell about the, blossom), she would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent cradle, where phoenix-like
They died in perfume. On my head no toy
But was her pattern, her affections (pretty,
Though happily her careless [wear]) I followed
For my most serious decking. Had mine ear
Stol'n some new air, or at adventure hummed [one]
From musical coinage, why, it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojourn (rather dwell on)
And sing it in her slumbers. This rehearsal
(Which, [ev'ry] innocent wots well, comes in
Like old importment's bastard) has this end,
That the true love 'tween maid and maid may be
And this high-speeded pace is but to say 
That you shall never (like the maid Flavina)
Love any that's called man. I am sure I shall not. 
I must no more believe thee in this point
(Though in't I know thou dost believe thyself)
Than I will trust a sickly appetite,
That loathes even as it longs. But sure, my sister,
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the arm
Of the all-noble Theseus, for whose fortunes
I will now in and kneel, with great assurance
That we, more than his Pirithous, possess
The high throne in his heart. I am not
Against your faith, yet I continue mine. 
To thee no star be dark. Both heaven and earth
Friend thee for ever. All the good that may 
Be wished upon thy head, I cry amen to't.
Th' impartial gods, who from the mounted heavens
View us their mortal herd, behold who err,
And in their time chastise. Go and find out
The bones of your dead lords, and honor them
With treble ceremony; rather than a gap
Should be in their dear rites, we would supply't.
But those we will depute which shall invest
You in your dignities, and even each thing
Our haste does leave imperfect. So adieu,
And heaven's good eyes look on you! What are those?
Men of great quality, as may be judged
By their appointment. Some of Thebes have told's
They are sisters' children, nephews to the King. 
By th' helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of lions smeared with prey, 
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note 
Constantly on them; for they were a mark
Worth a god's view. What [was't that prisoner] told me
When I inquired their names? [Wi'] leave, they're called
Arcite and Palamon.'Tis right -- those, those.
Nor in a state of life; had they been taken
When their last hurts were given, 'twas possible
They might have been recovered. Yet they breathe
And have the name of men. Then like men use' em.
The very lees of such (millions of rates)
Exceed the wine of others. All our surgeons
Convent in their behoof, our richest balms,
Rather than niggard, waste; their lives concern us
Much more than Thebes is worth. Rather than have 'em
Freed of this plight, and in their morning state 
(Sound and at liberty), I would 'em dead;
But forty thousand fold we had rather have 'em 
Prisoners to us than death. Bear 'em speedily 
From our kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man to man may do; for our sake more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends' behests,
Love's provocations, zeal, a mistress' task
Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,
Hath set a mark which nature could not reach to
Without some imposition, sickness in will
[O'er-]wrastling strength in reason. For our love,
And great Apollo's mercy, all our best
Their best skill tender. -- Lead into the city,
Where having bound things scattered, we will post
I may depart with little, while I live;
The Duke has lost Hippolyta; each took
A several land. This is a solemn rite
They owe bloomed May, and the Athenians pay it
To th' heart of ceremony. O queen Emilia,
Than her gold buttons on the boughs, or all
Th' enamelled knacks o' th' mead or garden! yea
(We challenge too) the bank of any nymph, 
That makes the stream seem flowers! thou, O jewel
O' th' wood, o' th' world, hast likewise blest a [place] 
With thy sole presence. In thy rumination
That I, poor man, might eftsoons come between
And chop on some cold thought! Thrice-blessed chance,
To drop on such a mistress, expectation
Most guiltless on't. Tell me, O Lady Fortune
(Next after Emily my sovereign), how far
I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,
Hath made me near her; and this beauteous morn
(The prim'st of all the year) presents me with
A brace of horses; two such steeds might well
Be by a pair of kings backed, in a field
That their crowns' titles tried. Alas, alas,
Poor cousin Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So little dream'st upon my fortune that
Thou think'st thyself the happier thing to be
So near Emilia. Me thou deem'st at Thebes,
And therein wretched, although free. But if
Thou knew'st my mistress breathed on me, and that
I eared her language, lived in her eye, O coz, 
What passion would enclose thee! Traitor kinsman,
Thou shouldst perceive my passion, if these signs
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a sword! By all oaths in one,
I, and the justice of my love, would make thee
A confessed traitor! O thou most perfidious
That ever gently looked! the [void'st] of honor
That ev'r bore gentle token! falsest cousin
That ever blood made kin, call'st thou her thine?
I'll prove it in my shackles, with these hands
Void of appointment, that thou li'st, and art
A very thief in love, a chaffy lord,
Nor worth the name of villain! Had I a sword,
And these house-clogs away -- Dear cousin Palamon --
Cozener Arcite, give me language such
As thou hast showed me feat. Not finding in
The circuit of my breast any gross stuff 
To form me like your blazon, holds me to
This gentleness of answer: 'tis your passion 
That thus mistakes, the which to you being enemy, 
Cannot to me be kind. Honor and honesty
I cherish and depend on, howsoev'r
You skip them in me, and with them, fair coz,
I'll maintain my proceedings. Pray be pleased
To show in generous terms your griefs, since that
Your question's with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way with the mind and sword
Of a true gentleman. That thou durst, Arcite!
My coz, my coz, you have been well advertised
How much I dare; y'ave seen me use my sword
Against th' advice of fear. Sure, of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though i' th' sanctuary. Sir,
I have seen you move in such a place which well
Might justify your manhood; you were called
A good knight and a bold. But the whole week's not fair 
If any day it rain. Their valiant temper
Men lose when they incline to treachery, 
And then they fight like compelled bears, would fly 
Were they not tied. Kinsman, you might as well
Speak this and act it in your glass, as to
His ear which now disdains you. Come up to me,
Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword
Though it be rusty, and the charity
Of one meal lend me; come before me then,
A good sword in thy hand, and do but say
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou hast done me, yea, my life
If then thou carry't, and brave souls in shades
That have died manly, which will seek of me
Some news from earth, they shall get none but this --
That thou art brave and noble. Be content,
Again betake you to your hawthorn house.
With counsel of the night, I will be here
With wholesome viands; these impediments 
Will I file off; you shall have garments, and
Perfumes to kill the smell o' th' prison; after, 
When you shall stretch yourself, and say but, "Arcite, 
I am in plight," there shall be at your choice
Both sword and armor. O you heavens, dares any
So noble bear a guilty business? None
But only Arcite; therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold. Sweet Palamon --
I do embrace you and your offer. For
Your offer do't I only, sir; your person
Without hypocrisy I may not wish
More than my sword's edge on't. You hear the horns:
Enter your [musit], lest this match between's
Be crossed ere met. Give me your hand, farewell.
I'll bring you every needful thing. I pray you
Take comfort and be strong. Pray hold your promise;
And do the deed with a bent brow. Most certain
You love me not; be rough with me, and pour 
This oil out of your language. By this air,
I could for each word give a cuff, my stomach 
Not reconciled by reason.  Plainly spoken,
Yet pardon me hard language. When I spur
My horse, I chide him [not]; content and anger
In me have but one face. Hark, sir, they call
The scattered to the banket. You must guess
I have an office there. Sir, your attendance
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is achieved. If a good title,
I am persuaded this question, sick between's,
By bleeding must be cured. I am a suitor
That to your sword you will bequeath this plea,
And talk of it no more. But this one word:
You are going now to gaze upon my mistress,
For note you, mine she is -- Nay then -- Nay, pray you -- 
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength;
You are going now to look upon a sun 
That strengthens what it looks on; there you have 
A vantage o'er me, but enjoy't till
I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.
He has mistook the [brake] I meant, is gone
After his fancy. 'Tis now well-nigh morning;
No matter, would it were perpetual night,
And darkness lord o' th' world! Hark, 'tis a wolf!
In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing,
I care for nothing, and that's Palamon.
I reak not if the wolves would jaw me, so
He had this file. What if I hallowed for him?
I cannot hallow. If I whooped, what then?
If he not answered, I should call a wolf,
And do him but that service. I have heard
Strange howls this livelong night; why may't not be 
They have made prey of him? He has no weapons,
He cannot run, the jingling of his gyves 
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them 
A sense to know a man unarmed, and can
Smell where resistance is. I'll set it down
He's torn to pieces. They howled many together,
And then they [fed] on him. So much for that,
Be bold to ring the bell. How stand I then?
All's chared when he is gone. No, no, lie:
My father's to be hanged for his escape,
Myself to beg, if I prized life so much
As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dozens. I am moped
Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes
Save when my lids scoured off their [brine]. Alas,
Dissolve, my life, let not my sense unsettle
Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself.
O state of nature, fail together in me,
Since thy best props are warped! So-which way now?
The best way is, the next way to a grave;
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo
The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screech-owl 
Calls in the dawn! All offices are done 
Save what I fail in. But the point is this -- 
I should be near the place. Ho, cousin Palamon!
Arcite? The same. I have brought you food and files.
Come forth and fear not, here's no Theseus.
Nor none so honest, Arcite. That's no matter,
We'll argue that hereafter. Come, take courage,
You shall not die thus beastly. Here, sir, drink --
I know you are faint -- then I'll talk further with you.
Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.  I might;
But I must fear you first. Sit down, and good now 
No more of these vain parleys; let us not, 
Having our ancient reputation with us,
Make talk for fools and cowards. To your health, etc. 
Do. Pray sit down then, and let me entreat you
By all the honesty and honor in you,
No mention of this woman. 'Twill disturb us,
We shall have time enough. Well, sir, I'll pledge you. 
Drink a good hearty draught, it breeds good blood, man.
Do not you feel it thaw you? Stay, I'll tell you
After a draught or two more. Spare it not,
The Duke has more, coz. Eat now. Yes.  I am glad
You have so good a stomach.  I am gladder
I have so good meat to't. Is't not mad lodging 
Here in the wild woods, cousin? Yes, for [them]
That have wild consciences. How tastes your victuals?
Your hunger needs no sauce, I see. Not much.
But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.
What is this? Venison. 'Tis a lusty meat.
Give me more wine. Here, Arcite, to the wenches
We have known in our days! The Lord Steward's daughter --
Do you remember her? After you, coz.
She loved a black-haired man. She did so; well, sir?
And I have heard some call him Arcite, and --
Out with't, faith! She met him in an arbor: 
What did she there, coz? play o' th' virginals?
Something she did, sir. Made her groan a month for't; 
Or two, or three, or ten. The Marshal's sister
Had her share too, as I remember, cousin,
Else there be tales abroad. You'll pledge her? Yes.
A pretty brown wench 'tis. There was a time
When young men went a-hunting, and a wood,
And a broad beech; and thereby hangs a tale.
Heigh-ho! For Emily, upon my life! 
Away with this strained mirth! I say again,
That sigh was breathed for Emily. Base cousin,
Dar'st thou break first? You are wide.
By heaven and earth, There's nothing in thee honest.
Then I'll leave you; You are a beast now.
There's all things needful, files and shirts and perfumes.
I'll come again some two hours hence and bring 
That that shall quiet all. A sword and armor.
Fear me not. You are now too foul; farewell.
Get off your trinkets, you shall want nought. Sirrah --
I'll hear no more.  If he keep touch, he dies for't. 
I am very cold, and all the stars are out too,
The little stars and all, that look like aglets.
The sun has seen my folly. Palamon!
Alas, no; he's in heaven. Where am I now?
Yonder's the sea, and there's a ship. How't tumbles! 
And there's a rock lies watching under water,;
Now, now, it beats upon it -- now, now, now!
There's a leak sprung, a sound one. How they cry!
[Open] her before the wind! you'll lose all else.
Up with a course or two, and tack about, boys!
Good night, good night, y' are gone. I am very hungry: 
Would I could find a fine frog! he would tell me
News from all parts o' th' world. Then would I make 
A carreck of a cockleshell, and sail 
By east and north-east to the King of Pigmies,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my father,
Twenty to one, is trussed up in a trice
To-morrow morning; I'll say never a word. 
"For I'll cut my green coat a foot above my knee,
And I'll clip my yellow locks an inch below mine e'e. 
"He s' buy me a white cut, forth for to ride,
And I'll go seek him through the world that is so wide.
O for a prick now, like a nightingale,
Is here among ye! Have my rudiments
Been labored so long with ye, milked unto ye,
And by a figure, even the very plum-broth
And marrow of my understanding laid upon ye,
And do you still cry, "Where?" and "How?" and "Wherefore?"
You most coarse frieze capacities, ye [jane] judgments,
Have I said, "Thus let be," and "There let be,"
And "Then let be," and no man understand me?
ye are all dunces! For why, here stand I; 
Close in the thicket. The Duke appears, I meet him
And unto him I utter learned things,
And many figures; he hears, and nods, and hums,
And then cries, "Rare!" and I go forward. At length
I fling my cap up; mark there! Then do you,
As once did Meleager and the boar,
Break comely out before him; like true lovers,
Cast yourselves in a body decently, 
And sweetly, by a figure, trace and turn, boys.
And sweetly we will do it, Master Gerrold. 
Draw up the company. Where's the taborer?
Why, Timothy! Here, my mad boys, have at ye!
But I say, where's their women? Here's Friz and Maudline.
And freckled Nell -- that never failed her master.
Where be your ribands, maids? Swim with your bodies,
And carry it sweetly and deliverly,
And now and then a favor and a frisk.
Let us alone, sir. Where's the rest o' th' music?
Dispersed as you commanded. Couple then,
And see what's wanting. Where's the Bavian?
My friend, carry your tail without offense 
Or scandal to the ladies; and be sure
You tumble with audacity and manhood, 
And when you bark, do it with judgment. 
We may go whistle; all the fat's i' th' fire.
We have, as learned authors utter, washed 
a tile,  We have been  and labored vainly.
This is that scornful piece, that scurvy hilding,
That gave her promise faithfully she would
Be here, Cicely the sempster's daughter.
The next gloves that I give her shall be dogskin;
Nay, and she fail me once -- You can tell, Arcas.
She swore by wine and bread she would not break.
A learned poet says, unless by th' tail
And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail.
In manners this was false position.
A fire ill take her! does she flinch now? What 
Our business is become a nullity, 
Yea, and a woeful and a piteous nullity.
Now when the credit of our town lay on it,
Now to be frampal, now to piss o' th' nettle!
Go thy ways, I'll remember thee, I'll fit thee!
Persuasively and cunningly. Away, boys!
I hear the horns. Give me some meditation,
And mark your cue. Pallas inspire me!
This way the stag took. Stay, and edify.
Some country sport, upon my life, sir.
Well, sir, go forward, we will edify.
Thou doughty Duke, all hail! All hail, sweet ladies! 
If you but favor, our country pastime made is.
We are a few of those collected here 
That ruder tongues distinguish villager, 
And to say verity, and not to fable,
We are a merry rout, or else a rable,
Or company, or, by a figure, choris,
That 'fore thy dignity will dance a morris.
And I, that am the rectifier of all,
By title paedagogus, that let fall
The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a ferula the tall ones,
Do here present this machine, or this frame,
And, dainty Duke, whose doughty dismal fame
From Dis to Daedalus, from post to pillar,
Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,
And with thy twinkling eyes look right and straight
Upon this mighty of mickle weight --
now comes in, which being glued together
Makes  and the cause that we came hither.
The body of our sport, of no small study,
I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,
To speak, before thy noble Grace, this tenner;
At whose great feet I offer up my penner. 
The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid and Servingman, by night 
That seek out silent hanging. Then mine Host 
And his fat spouse, that welcomes to their cost
The galled traveller, and with a beck'ning
Informs the tapster to inflame the reck'ning.
Then the beast-eating Clown, and next the Fool,
The Bavian, with long tail and eke long tool,
Say "Ay," and all shall presently advance.
Ay, ay, by any means, dear domine. Produce.
About this hour my cousin gave his faith 
To visit me again, and with him bring 
Two swords and two good armors. If he fail,
He's neither man nor soldier. When he left me,
I did not think a week could have restored
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low
And crestfall'n with my wants. I thank thee, Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair foe; and I feel myself,
With this refreshing, able once again
To out-dure danger. To delay it longer
Would make the world think, when it comes to hearing,
That I lay fatting like a swine, to fight,
And not a soldier: therefore this blest morning
Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with. 'Tis justice.
So, love and fortune for me! O, good morrow.
Good morrow, noble kinsman. I have put you
To too much pains, sir. That too much, fair cousin,
Is but a debt to honor, and my duty. 
Would you were so in all, sir! I could wish ye
As kind a kinsman as you force me find 
A beneficial foe, that my embraces 
Might thank ye, not my blows. I shall think either,
Well done, a noble recompense. Then I shall quit you.
Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More than a mistress to me; no more anger,
As you love any thing that's honorable.
We were not bred to talk, man. When we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury,
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us,
And then to whom the birthright of this beauty
Truly pertains (without obbraidings, scorns,
Despisings of our persons, and such poutings,
Fitter for girls and schoolboys) will be seen,
And quickly, yours or mine. Will't please you arm, sir? 
Or if you feel yourself not fitting yet
And furnished with your old strength, I'll stay, cousin,
And ev'ry day discourse you into health,
As I am spared. Your person I am friends with, 
And I could wish I had not said I loved her,
Though I had died; but loving such a lady 
And justifying my love, I must not fly from't. 
Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy
That no man but thy cousin's fit to kill thee.
well and lusty, choose your arms. Choose you, sir.
Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it
To make me spare thee? If you think so, cousin,
You are deceived, for as I am a soldier,
I will not spare you. That's well said. You'll find it.
Then as I am an honest man, and love
With all the justice of affection,
I'll pay thee soundly. This I'll take. That's mine then.
I'll arm you first. Do. Pray thee tell me, cousin,
Where got'st thou this good armor? 'Tis the Duke's,
And to say true, I stole it. Do I pinch you? 
No. Is't not too heavy?  I have worn a lighter, 
But I shall make it serve. I'll buckle't close.
By any means. You care not for a grand-guard?
No, no, we'll use no horses. I perceive
You would fain be at that fight. I am indifferent.
Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle
Through far enough. I warrant you. My casque now.
Will you fight bare-armed? We shall be the nimbler.
But use your gauntlets though. Those are o' th' least;
Prithee take mine, good cousin. Thank you, Arcite.
How do I look? am I fall'n much away?
Faith, very little. Love has used you kindly.
I'll warrant thee, I'll strike home. Do, and spare not.
I'll give you cause, sweet cousin. Now to you, sir. 
Methinks this armor's very like that, Arcite,
Thou wor'st that day the three kings fell, but lighter.
That was a very good one, and that day,
I well remember, you outdid me, cousin;
I never saw such valor. When you charged
Upon the left wing of the enemy,
I spurred hard to come up, and under me
I had a right good horse. You had indeed,
A bright bay, I remember. Yes, but all
Was vainly labored in me; you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you. Yet a little
I did by imitation. More by virtue.
You are modest, cousin. When I saw you charge first,
Methought I heard a dreadful clap of thunder
Break from the troop. But still before that flew 
The lightning of your valor. Stay a little;
Is not this piece too strait?  No, no, 'tis well. 
I would have nothing hurt thee but my sword,
A bruise would be dishonor. Now I am perfect.
Stand off then. Take my sword, I hold it better.
I thank ye. No, keep it, your life lies on it.
Here's one, if it but hold, I ask no more
For all my hopes. My cause and honor guard me!
And me my love! Is there aught else to say?
This only, and no more: thou art mine aunt's son,
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual,
In me, thine, and in thee, mine. My sword
Is in my hand, and if thou kill'st me,
The gods and I forgive thee. If there be
A place prepared for those that sleep in honor,
I wish his weary soul that falls may win it.
Fight bravely, cousin. Give me thy noble hand. 
Here, Palamon: this hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship. I commend thee. 
If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such dare die in these just trials.
Once more farewell, my cousin. Farewell, Arcite.
Lo, cousin, lo, our folly has undone us.
This is the Duke, a-hunting as I told you.
If we be found, we are wretched. O, retire
For honor's sake, and safely presently
Into your bush again, sir. We shall find
Too many hours to die in, gentle cousin.
If you be seen, you perish instantly
For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt. Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it. No, no, cousin,
I will no more be hidden, nor Put off
This great adventure to a second trial. 
I know your cunning, and I know your cause.
He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself 
Upon thy present guard -- You are not mad?
Or I will make th' advantage of this hour
Mine own; and what to come shall threaten me
I fear less than my fortune. Know, weak cousin,
l love Emilia, and in that I'll bury
Thee and all crosses else. Then come what can come,
Thou shalt know, Palamon, I dare as well
Die as discourse or sleep. Only this fears me,
The law will have the honor of our ends.
Have at thy life! Look to thine own well, Arcite.
What ignorant and mad malicious traitors
Are you, that 'gainst the tenor of my laws
Are making battle, thus like knights appointed,
Without my leave and officers of arms? 
By Castor, both shall die. Hold thy word, Theseus. 
We are certainly both traitors, both despisers 
Of thee and of thy goodness. I am Palamon,
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison --
Think well what that deserves; and this is Arcite,
A bolder traitor never trod thy ground,
A falser nev'r seemed friend. This is the man
Was begged and banished, this is he contemns thee
And what thou dar'st do; and in this disguise,
Against [thy] own edict, follows thy sister,
That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia,
Whose servant (if there be a right in seeing,
And first bequeathing of the soul to) justly
I am, and which is more, dares think her his.
This treachery, like a most trusty lover,
I called him now to answer. If thou be'st,
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true decider of all injuries,
Say, "Fight again!" and thou shalt see me, Theseus,
Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy.
Then take my life, I'll woo thee to't. O heaven, 
What more than man is this! I have sworn. We seek not 
Thy breath of mercy, Theseus. 'Tis to me
A thing as soon to die as thee to say it,
And no more moved. Where this man calls me traitor,
Let me say thus much: if in love be treason
In service of so excellent a beauty,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this cousin that denies it,
So let me be most traitor, and ye please me.
For scorning thy edict, Duke, ask that lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say "traitor,"
I am a villain fit to lie unburied.
Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy. Stop,
As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;
As thou art valiant, for thy cousin's soul,
Whose twelve strong labors crown his memory,
Let's die together, at one instant, Duke. 
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my soul he shall not have her. 
I grant your wish, for to say true, your cousin 
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy than you found, sir, your offenses
Being no more than his. None here speak for 'em,
For ere the sun set, both shall sleep for ever.
Alas, the pity! Now or never, sister,
Speak, not to be denied. That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after-ages
For these lost cousins. In my face, dear sister,
I find no anger to 'em, nor no ruin:
The misadventure of their own eyes kill 'em;
Yet that I will be woman, and have pity,
My knees shall grow to th' ground but I'll get mercy.
Help me, dear sister, in a deed so virtuous
The powers of all women will be with us.
Most royal brother -- Sir, by our tie of marriage --
By your own spotless honor -- By that faith, 
That fair had, and that honest heart you gave me --
By that you would have pity in another, 
By your own virtues infinite -- By valor,
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you --
These are strange conjurings. Nay then I'll in too. 
By all our friendship, sir, by all our dangers,
By all you love most -- wars, and this sweet lady -- 
By that you would have trembled to deny
A blushing maid -- By your own eyes, by strength, 
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded, Theseus --
To crown all this, by your most noble soul,
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.
Next hear my prayers. Last let me entreat, sir.
For mercy.  Mercy. Mercy on these princes.
Compassion to 'em both, how would you place it?
Upon their lives; but with their banishments.
You are a right woman, sister, you have pity,
But want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer than banishment. Can these two live,
And have the agony of love about 'em,
And not kill one another? Every day
They'ld fight about you; hourly bring your honor
In public question with their swords. Be wise then 
And here forget 'em; it concerns your credit
And my oath equally. I have said they die; 
Better they fall by th' law than one another. 
Bow not my honor. O my noble brother,
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger,
Your reason will not hold it. If such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Beside, I have another oath 'gainst yours,
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.
What is it, sister? Urge it home, brave lady.
That you would nev'r deny me any thing
Fit for my modest suit and your free granting.
I tie you to your word now; if ye fall in't,
(For now I am set a-begging, sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassion), how their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name; opinion,
Shall any thing that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom. Do men proin
The straight young boughs that blush with thousand blossoms,
Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus, 
The goodly mothers that have groaned for these, 
And all the longing maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,
And in their funeral songs for these two cousins
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.
For heaven's sake save their lives, and banish 'em.
On what conditions? Swear 'em never more
To make me their contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy dukedom, and to be,
Where ever they shall travel, ever strangers
To one another. I'll be cut a-pieces
Before I take this oath. Forget I love her?
O all ye gods, despise me then. Thy banishment
I not mislike, so we may fairly carry
Our swords and cause along; else, never trifle,
But take our lives Duke. I must love, and will,
And for that love must and dare kill this cousin,
On any piece the earth has.  Will you, Arcite,
Take these conditions?  He's a villain then. 
No, never, Duke. 'Tis worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely. Though I think
I never shall enjoy her, yet I'll preserve
The honor of affection, and die for her,
What may be done? for now I feel compassion.
Let it not fall again, sir. Say, Emilia,
If one of them were dead, as one must, are you
Content to take th' other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you. They are princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of. Look upon 'em,
And if you can love, end this difference.
I give consent. -- Are you content too, princes?
Must die then. Any death thou canst invent, Duke. 
If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favor, 
And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.
If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And soldiers sing my epitaph. Make choice then.
I cannot, sir, they are both too excellent:
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.
What will become of 'em? Thus I ordain it,
And by mine honor, once again it stands,
Or both shall die: you shall both to your country,
And each within this month, accompanied
With three fair knights, appear again in this place,
In which I'll plant a pyramid; and whether,
Before us that are here, can force his cousin
By fair and knightly strength to touch the pillar,
He shall enjoy her; the other lose his head,
And all his friends; nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this lady.
Will this content ye? Yes. Here, cousin Arcite, 
I am friends again till that hour. I embrace ye. 
Are you content, sister?  Yes, I must, sir,
Else both miscarry. Come shake hands again then,
And take heed, as you are gentlemen, this quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed and hold your course.
We dare not fail thee, Theseus. Come, I'll give ye
Now usage like to princes and to friends.
When ye return, who wins I'll settle here;
Who loses, yet I'll weep upon his bier. 
I think she has a perturbed mind, which I 
cannot minister to.  Alas, what then?
Understand you she ever affected any man
Before the god of our profession. There
Require of him the hearts of lions and
The breath of tigers, yea, the fierceness too,
Yea, the speed also -- to go on, I mean,
Else wish we to be snails. You know my prize
Must be dragged out of blood; force and great feat
Must put my garland on, where she sticks
The queen of flowers. Our intercession then
Must be to him that makes the camp a cestron
Brimmed with the blood of men. Give me your aid
And bend your spirits towards him.
Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turned
Comets prewarn, whose havoc in vast field 
Unearthed skulls proclaim, whose breath blows down
The teeming Ceres' foison, who dost pluck 
With hand armipotent from forth blue clouds 
The masoned turrets, that both mak'st and break'st
The stony girths of cities: me thy pupil,
Youngest follower of thy drum, instruct this day
With military skill, that that to thy laud
I may advance my streamer, and by thee
Be styled the lord o' th' day. Give me, great Mars,
O great corrector of enormous times,
Shaker of o'er-rank states, thou grand decider
Of dusty and old titles, that heal'st with blood
The earth when it is sick, and cur'st the world
O' th' plurisy of people! I do take
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design march boldly. -- Let us go. 
Our stars must glister with new fire, or be 
To-day extinct. Our argument is love, 
Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too. Then blend your spirits with mine,
You whose free nobleness do make my cause
Your personal hazard. To the goddess Venus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Hail, sovereign queen of secrets, who hast power
To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage,
And weep unto a girl; that hast the might,
Even with an eye-glance, to choke Mars's drum
And turn th' alarm to whispers; that canst make
A cripple flourish with his crutch, and cure him
Before Apollo; that mayst force the king
To be his subject's vassal, and induce
Stale gravity to dance; the polled bachelor,
Whose youth, like wanton boys through bonfires,
Have skipped thy flame, at seventy thou canst catch,
And make him, to the scorn of his hoarse throat, 
Abuse young lays of love. What godlike power
Hast thou not power upon? To Phoebus thou 
Add'st flames, hotter than his; the heavenly fires 
Did scorch his mortal son, thine him. The huntress
All moist and cold, some say, began to throw
Her bow away, and sigh. Take to thy grace
Me thy vowed soldier, who do bear thy yoke
As 'twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier
Than lead itself, stings more than nettles. I
Have never been foul-mouthed against thy law,
Nev'r revealed secret, for I knew none -- would not,
Had I kenned all that were. I never practiced
Upon man's wife, nor would the libels read
Of liberal wits. I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a beauty, but have blushed
At simp'ring sirs that did. I have been harsh
To large confessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had mothers; I had one, a woman,
And women 'twere they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters -- this I told them -- who
A lass of fourteen brided. 'Twas thy power
To put life into dust: the aged cramp
Had screwed his square foot round, 
The gout had knit his fingers into knots,
Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes 
Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life 
In him seemed torture. This anatomy
Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? Brief, I am
To those that prate and have done, no companion;
To those that boast and have not, a defier;
To those that would and cannot, a rejoicer.
Yea, him I do not love that tells close offices
The foulest way, nor names concealments in
The boldest language. Such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer than I. O then, most soft sweet goddess,
Give me the victory of this question, which
Is true love's merit, and bless me with a sign
O thou that from eleven to ninety reign'st
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world,
And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks 
For this fair token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance 
My body to this business. -- Let us rise 
And bow before the goddess. Time comes on.
O sacred, shadowy, cold, and constant queen,
Abandoner of revels, mute, contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As wind-fanned snow, who to thy female knights
Allow'st no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their order's robe: I here, thy priest,
Am humbled 'fore thine altar. O, vouchsafe,
With that thy rare green eye -- which never yet
Beheld thing maculate -- look on thy virgin, 
And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear
(Which nev'r heard scurril term, into whose port 
Ne'er ent'red wanton sound) to my petition, 
Seasoned with holy fear. This is my last
Of vestal office; I am bride-habited,
But maiden-hearted. A husband I have 'pointed,
But do not know him. Out of two I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election. Of mine eyes
Were I to lose one, they are equal precious,
I could doom neither; that which perished should
Go to't unsentenced. Therefore, most modest queen,
He of the two pretenders that best loves me
And has the truest title in't, let him
Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant
The file and quality I hold I may
See what our general of ebbs and flows
Out from the bowels of her holy altar
With sacred act advances: but one rose!
If well inspired, this battle shall confound 
Both these brave knights, and I, a virgin flow'r,
The flow'r is fall'n, the tree descends. O mistress,
Thou here dischargest me. I shall be gathered,
I think so, but I know not thine own will:
Unclasp thy mystery. -- I hope she's pleased,
Her signs were gracious. I'll no step further.
I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly
Than this decision. Ev'ry blow that falls
Threats a brave life, each stroke laments
The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like
A bell than blade. I will stay here,
It is enough my hearing shall be punished
With what shall happen -- 'gainst the which there is
No deafing -- but to hear, not taint mine eye
With dread sights it may shun. Sir, my good lord,
Your sister will no further. O, she must.
She shall see deeds of honor in their kind
Which sometime show well, pencilled. Nature now
Shall make and act the story, the belief
Both sealed with eye and ear. You must be present,
You are the victor's meed, the price and garland 
To crown the question's title. Pardon me, 
If I were there, I'ld wink. You must be there;
This trial is as 'twere i' th' night, and you
The only star to shine. I am extinct,
There is but envy in that light which shows
The one the other. Darkness, which ever was
The dam of Horror, who does stand accursed
Of many mortal millions, may even now,
By casting her black mantle over both,
That neither could find other, get herself
Some part of a good name, and many a murther
Set off whereto she's guilty. You must go.
In faith, I will not. Why, the knights must kindle
Their valor at your eye. Know, of this war
You are the treasure, and must needs be by
To give the service pay. Sir, pardon me,
The title of a kingdom may be tried 
Out of itself. Well, well then, at your pleasure. 
Those that remain with you could wish their office 
To any of their enemies. Farewell, sister,
I am like to know your husband 'fore yourself
By some small start of time. He whom the gods
Do of the two know best, I pray them he
Arcite is gently visaged; yet his eye
Is like an engine bent, or a sharp weapon
In a soft sheath; mercy and manly courage
Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect, his brow
Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on,
Yet sometime 'tis not so, but alters to
The quality of his thoughts; long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object; melancholy
Becomes him nobly. So does Arcite's mirth,
But Palamon's sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled as if mirth did make him sad,
And sadness merry; those darker humors that 
Stick misbecomingly on others, on [him]
Hark how yon spurs to spirit do incite
The princes to their Proof! Arcite may win me,
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity
Enough for such a chance? If I were by,
I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes
Toward my seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward, or forfeit an offense,
Which craved that very time. It is much better
I am not there. O, better never born
Than minister to such harm! "A Palamon!"
-What is the chance? The cry's "A Palamon!"
Then he has won. 'Twas ever likely:
He looked all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the prim'st of men. I prithee run 
And tell me how it goes. "A Palamon!"  
Run and inquire. Poor servant, thou hast lost.
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamon's on the left. Why so, know not;
I had no end in't else; chance would have it so.
On the sinister side the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best-boding chance. This burst of clamor
They said that Palamon had Arcite's body
Within an inch o' th' pyramid, that the cry
Was general "A Palamon!"; but anon
Th' assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold titlers at this instant are
Hand to hand at it. Were they metamorphised
Both into one -- O why? there were no woman 
Worth so composed a man! Their single share,
Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives 
The prejudice of disparity, value's shortness, 
To any lady breathing. , "Arcite, Arcite!',
"Palamon" still? Nay, now the sound is "Arcite."
I prithee lay attention to the cry;
Set both thine ears to th' business.  "'Arcite! victory!"
"Arcite!" and "victory!" Hark, "Arcite! victory!"
The combat's consummation is proclaimed
That Arcite was no babe. God's lid, his richness
And costliness of spirit looked through him, it could
No more be hid in him than fire in flax,
Than humble banks can go to law with waters
That drift-winds force to raging. I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so. Our reasons are not prophets 
When oft our fancies are. They are coming off.
Lo, where our sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking and unsettled. Fairest Emily,
The gods by their divine arbitrement
Have given you this knight: he is a good one
As ever strook at head. Give me your hands.
Receive you her, you him, be plighted with
A love that grows as you decay. Emily,
To buy you I have lost what's dearest to me
Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheaply,
As I do rate your value. O loved sister,
He speaks now of as brave a knight as e'er
Did spur a noble steed. Surely the gods
Would have him die a bachelor, lest his race
Should show i' th' world too godlike. His behavior 
So charmed me that methought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead. If I could praise 
Each part of him to th' all I have spoke, your Arcite 
Did not lose by't; for he that was thus good
Encount'red yet his better. I have heard
Two emulous Philomels beat the ear o' th' night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by and by out-breasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between 'em. So it fared
Good space between these kinsmen; till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner. -- Wear the girlond
With joy that you have won. -- For the subdued,
Give them our present justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch 'em. Let it here be done.
The scene's not for our seeing, go we hence,
Right joyful, with some sorrow. -- Arm your prize,
I know you will not loose her. -- Hippolyta,
I see one eye of yours conceives a tear,
The which it will deliver. Is this winning?
O all you heavenly powers, where is [your] mercy?
But that your wills have said it must be so, 
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable prince, that cuts away 
A life more worthy from him than all women, 
I should and would die too. Infinite pity
That four such eyes should be so fixed on one
That two must needs be blind for't! So it is. 
There's many a man alive that hath outlived
The love o' th' people, yea, i' th' self-same state
Stands many a father with his child. Some comfort
We have by so considering: we expire,
And not without men's pity; to live still,
Have their good wishes; we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The gout and rheum, that in lag hours attend
For grey approachers; we come towards the gods 
Young and unwappered, not halting under crimes
Many and stale. That sure shall please the gods 
Sooner than such, to give us nectar with 'em, 
For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,
Whose lives (for this poor comfort) are laid down,
You have sold 'em too too cheap. What ending could be
Of more content? O'er us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary
As to us death is certain. A grain of honor
They not o'erweigh us. Let us bid farewell;
And with our patience anger tott'ring Fortune,
Who at her certain'st reels. Come! Who begins?
Ev'n he that led you to this banket shall
Taste to you all.  Ah ha, my friend, my friend,
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
You'll see't done now for ever. Pray how does she?
I heard she was not well; her kind of ill
Gave me some sorrow. Sir, she's well restored, 
And to be married shortly. By my short life, 
I am most glad on't. 'Tis the latest thing 
I shall be glad of, prithee tell her so.
Commend me to her, and to piece her portion
Tender her this.  Nay, let's be offerers all.
A right good creature, more to me deserving
Than I can quite or speak of. Commend us to her.
The gods requite you all, and make her thankful!
Adieu; and let my life be now as short
As my leave-taking. Lead, courageous cousin.
We'll follow cheerfully. "Run! Save! Hold!"
Hold ho! It is a cursed haste you made 
If you have done so quickly. Noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life
That thou art yet to lead. Can that be, when
Venus I have said is false? How do things fare?
Arise, great sir, and give the tidings ear
That are most [dearly] sweet and bitter. What
Hath waked us from our dream? List then: your cousin,
Mounted upon a steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him -- a black one, owing
Not a hair-worth of white, which some will say
Weakens his price, and many will not buy
His goodness with this note; which superstition
Here finds allowance -- on this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens, which the calkins
Did rather tell than trample; for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if't pleased his rider 
To put pride in him. As he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing as 'twere to th' music 
His own hoofs made (for as they say from iron 
Came music's origin), what envious flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire malevolent, darted a spark,
Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made,
I comment not -- the hot horse, hot as fire,
Took toy at this, and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school-doing, being therein trained,
And of kind manage; pig-like he whines
At the sharp rowel, which he frets at rather
Than any jot obeys; seeks all foul means
Of boist'rous and rough jad'ry, to disseat
His lord that kept it bravely. When nought served,
Disroot his rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him 'tween his legs, on his hind hoofs
That Arcite's legs, being higher than his head,
Seemed with strange art to hang. His victor's wreath 
Even then fell off his head; and presently
Backward the jade comes o'er, and his full poise 
Becomes the rider's load. Yet is he living, 
But such a vessel 'tis that floats but for
The surge that next approaches. He much desires
To have some speech with you. Lo he appears.
O miserable end of our alliance!
The gods are mighty, Arcite. If thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart, be yet unbroken,
Give me thy last words; I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying. take Emilia,
And with her all the world's joy. Reach thy hand;
Farewell. I have told my last hour; I was false,
Yet never treacherous. Forgive me, cousin.
One kiss from fair Emilia. -- 'Tis done.
Take her. I die. Thy brave soul seek Elysium!
I'll close thine eyes, prince; blessed souls be with thee!
Thou art a right good man, and while I live, 
This day I give to tears. And I to honor. 
In this place first you fought; ev'n very here 
I sund'red you. Acknowledge to the gods
Our thanks that you are living.
His part is played, and though it were too short,
He did it well; your day is length'ned, and
The blissful dew of heaven does arrouse you.
The powerful Venus well hath graced her altar,
And given you your love. Our master Mars
[Hath] vouched his oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the contention So the deities
That we should things desire which do cost us
The loss of our desire! that nought could buy
Dear love but loss of dear love! Never fortune
Did play a subtler game. The conquered triumphs,
The victor has the loss; yet in the passage
The gods have been most equal. Palamon,
Your kinsman hath confessed the right o' th' lady 
Did lie in you, for you first saw her, and
Even then proclaimed your fancy. He restored her 
As your stol'n jewel, and desired your spirit 
To send him hence forgiven. The gods my justice
Take from my hand, and they themselves become
The executioners. Lead your lady off,;
And call your lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my friends. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of bridegrooms we'll put on
And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry
As glad of Arcite; and am now as glad
As for him sorry. O you heavenly charmers,
What things you make of us! For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have are sorry, still
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question. Let's go off,
