<TNVS> If music be the food of love, play on,
Give me excess of it; that surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so die.
That strain again, it had a dying fall;
O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odor. Enough, no more,
'Tis not so sweet now as it was before.
O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou,
That notwithstanding thy capacity
Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
But falls into abatement and low price
Even in a minute. So full of shapes is fancy 
That it alone is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt, my lord? What, Curio? 
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.
O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,
Methought she purged the air of pestilence!
That instant was I turned into a hart,
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
E'er since pursue me.  How now, what news from her?
So please my lord, I might not be admitted,
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The element itself, till seven years' heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view;
But like a cloistress she will veiled walk,
And water once a day her chamber round
With eye-offending brine; all this to season
A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting in her sad remembrance. 
O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother, 
How will she love when the rich golden shaft 
Hath killed the flock of all affections else
That live in her; when liver, brain, and heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied and filled
Her sweet perfections with one self king!
Away before me to sweet beds of flow'rs,
Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bow'rs.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium.
Perchance he is not drowned -- what think you, sailors?
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be. 
True, madam, and to comfort you with chance, 
Assure yourself, after our ship did split, 
When you, and those poor number saved with you,
Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
Most provident in peril, bind himself
(Courage and hope both teaching him the practice)
To a strong mast that lived upon the sea;
Where like [Arion] on the dolphin's back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The like of him.  Know'st thou this country?
Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born
Not three hours' travel from this very place.
A noble duke, in nature as in name.
Orsino!  I have heard my father name him.
And so is now, or was so very late;
For but a month ago I went from hence, 
And then 'twas fresh in murmur (as you know 
What great ones do, the less will prattle of)
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died; for whose dear love,
They say, she hath abjured the [company]
And [sight] of men. O that I served that lady,
And might not be delivered to the world
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow
What my estate is!  That were hard to compass,
Because she will admit no kind of suit,
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain,
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits 
With this thy fair and outward character.
I prithee (and I'll pay thee bounteously) 
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid 
For such disguise as haply shall become
The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke;
Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him,
It may be worth thy pains; for I can sing
And speak to him in many sorts of music
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap, to time I will commit,
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be;
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
Why, I think so. I am not such an ass but
I can keep my hand dry. But what's your jest?
A dry jest, sir. Are you full of them?
Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends.
Marry, now I let go your hand, I am barren.
O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary.
Stand you awhile aloof. Cesario,
Thou know'st no less but all. I have unclasped
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her,
Be not denied access, stand at her doors, 
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.  Sure, my noble lord, 
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,
Rather than make unprofited return.
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
O then, unfold the passion of my love,
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith;
It shall become thee well to act my woes:
She will attend it better in thy youth
Than in a nuntio's of more grave aspect.
I think not so, my lord.  Dear lad, believe it;
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
That say thou art a man. Diana's lip
Is not more smooth and rubious; thy small pipe
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
And all is semblative a woman's part.
I know thy constellation is right apt
For this affair.  Some four or five attend him --
All, if you will; for I myself am best 
When least in company.  Prosper well in this,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord, 
To call his fortunes thine.  I'll do my best
To woo your lady.   Yet a barful strife!
Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
Let him approach.  Call in my gentlewoman.
Give me my veil; come throw it o'er my face.
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy. 
Tell me your mind -- I am a messenger.
'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on.
Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
I see you what you are, you are too proud;
But if you were the devil, you are fair.
My lord and master loves you. O, such love
Could be but recompensed, though you were crowned 
The nonpareil of beauty.  How does he love me? 
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Your lord does know my mind, I cannot love him,
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant,
And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
A gracious person. But yet I cannot love him.
He might have took his answer long ago.
If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suff'ring, such a deadly life,
In your denial I would find no sense,
I would not understand it.  Why, what would you?
Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house;
Write loyal cantons of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
Hallow your name to the reverberate hills,
And make the babbling gossip of the air 
Cry out "Olivia!" O, you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth 
But you should pity me!  You might do much.
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a gentleman. Get you to your lord.
I cannot love him; let him send no more --
Unless (perchance) you come to me again
To tell me how he takes it.  Fare you well.
I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me.
I am no feed post, lady; keep your purse;
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love,
And let your fervor like my master's be
Placed in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.
"Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a gentleman."  I'll be sworn thou art;
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit
Do give thee fivefold blazon. Not too fast! soft, soft!
Unless the master were the man. How now? 
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
With an invisible and subtle stealth 
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
What ho, Malvolio!  Here, madam, at your service.
Run after that same peevish messenger,
The [County's] man.  He left this ring behind him,
Would I or not. Tell him I'll none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes: I am not for him.
If that the youth will come this way tomorrow,
I'll give him reasons for't. Hie thee, Malvolio.
I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
What is decreed must be; and be this so.
Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
I have many enemies in Orsino's court,
Else would I very shortly see thee there.
But come what may, I do adore thee so 
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Were you not ev'n now with the Countess Olivia?
I left no ring with her.  What means this lady?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her! 
She made good view of me; indeed so much 
That methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me sure, the cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger.
None of my lord's ring? Why, he sent her none.
I am the man!  If it be so, as 'tis,
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it for the proper-false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
Alas, [our] frailty is the cause, not we,
For such as we are made [of,] such we be.
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I (poor monster) fond as much on him;
And she (mistaken) seems to dote on me.
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love;
As I am woman (now alas the day!),
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe! 
O time, thou must untangle this, not I,
It is too hard a knot for me t' untie.
Give me some music.  Now good morrow, friends.
Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and antique song we heard last night;
Methought it did relieve my passion much,
More than light airs and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,
In the sweet pangs of it remember me; 
For such as I am, all true lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else, 
Save in the constant image of the creature 
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It gives a very echo to the seat
Where Love is throned.  Thou dost speak masterly.
My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath stayed upon some favor that it loves.
Hath it not, boy?  A little, by your favor.
What kind of woman is't?  Of your complexion.
She is not worth thee then.  What years, i' faith?
Too old, by heaven.  Let still the woman take
An elder than herself, so wears she to him;
So sways she level in her husband's heart.
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn, 
Than women's are.  I think it well, my lord. 
Then let thy love be younger than thyself, 
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
For women are as roses, whose fair flow'r
Being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
And so they are; alas, that they are so!
To die, even when they to perfection grow!
O fellow, come, the song we had last night.
Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain.
The spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
Do use to chaunt it. It is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love,
Like the old age. Are you ready, sir?
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.
Tell her, my love, more noble than the world,
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;
The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her,
Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune;
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
[I] cannot be so answered.  Sooth, but you must.
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is, 
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia.  You cannot love her; 
You tell her so.  Must she not then be answered? 
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much; they lack retention.
Alas, their love may be called appetite,
No motion of the liver, but the palate,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt,
But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
And can digest as much.  Make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me
And that I owe Olivia.  Ay, but I know --
Too well what love women to men may owe;
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter loved a man
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman,
I should your lordship.  And what's her history?
A blank, my lord; he never told her love, 
But let concealment like a worm i' th' bud
Feed on her damask cheek; she pined in thought, 
And with a green and yellow melancholy 
She sate like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief.  Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
I am all the daughters of my father's house,
And all the brothers too -- and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this lady?  Ay, that's the theme,
To her in haste; give her this jewel; say
My love can give no place, bide no denay.  
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,
And to do that well craves a kind of wit.
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time;
And like the haggard, check at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice
As fall of labor as a wise man's art;
For folly that he wisely shows is fit,
But wise [men], folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
My servant, sir?  'Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was called compliment.
Y' are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather than filled with me.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.  O, by your leave, I pray you:
I bade you never speak again of him;
But would you undertake another suit, 
I had rather hear you to solicit that
Than music from the spheres. Dear lady -- 
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
A ring in chase of you; so did I abuse
Myself, my servant, and I fear me you.
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours.  What might you think?
Have you not set mine honor at the stake,
And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts
Enough is shown; a cypress, not a bosom,
Hides my heart. So let me hear you speak.
I pity you.  That's a degree to love.
No, not a grize; for 'tis a vulgar proof
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why then methinks 'tis time to smile again.
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud! 
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf! 
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you,
And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,
Your wife is like to reap a proper man.
There lies your way, due west.  Then westward-ho!
Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!
You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
I prithee tell me what thou think'st of me.
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
I would you were as I would have you be.
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
A murd'rous guilt shows not itself more soon 
Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon. --
Cesario, by the roses of the spring, 
By maidhood, honor, truth, and every thing, 
I love thee so, that maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause;
But rather reason thus with reason fetter:
Love sought is good, but given unsought is better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu, good madam, never more
Will I my master's tears to you deplore.
Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart which now abhors, to like his love.
No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason. 
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
I would not by my will have troubled you,
But since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I could not stay behind you.  My desire
(More sharp than filed steel) did spur me forth, 
And not all love to see you (though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage) 
But jealousy what might befall your travel, 
Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
Unguided and unfriended,  often prove
Rough and unhospitable.  My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear,
Set forth in your pursuit. My kind Antonio,
I can no other answer make but thanks,
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay;
But were my worth as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing.  What's to do?
Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
tomorrow, sir; best first go see your lodging.
I am not weary, and 'tis long to night;
I pray you let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame
I do not without danger walk these streets. 
Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys
I did some service, of such note indeed, 
Belike you slew great number of his people?
Th' offense is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument.
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which for traffic's sake
Most of our city did.  Only myself stood out,
For which if I be lapsed in this place
I shall pay dear.  Do not then walk too open.
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here's my purse.
In the south suburbs at the Elephant
Is best to lodge.  I will bespeak our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time, and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase; and your store
I think is not for idle markets, sir.
For an hour.  To th' Elephant.  I do remember. 
I have sent after him; he says he'll come.
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft than begged or borrowed.
Where's Malvolio? He is sad and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes.
Go call him hither.  I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
How now, Malvolio? Sweet lady, ho, ho.
To bed?  Ay, sweet heart, and I'll come to thee.
At your request!  Yes, nightingales answer daws.
"Be not afraid of greatness": 'twas well writ.
What mean'st thou by that, Malvolio?  "Some are born great" --
Ha? "Some achieve greatness" -- What say'st thou?
"Remember who commended thy yellow stockings" --
"And wished to see thee cross-gartered."  Cross-gartered?
"Go to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so" --
"If not, let me see thee a servant still."
Why, this is very midsummer madness. 
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count
Prithee hold thy peace, this is not the way.
Do you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.
Why, how now, my bawcock? How dost thou, chuck?
I have said too much unto a heart of stone,
And laid mine honor too unchary on't.
There's something in me that reproves my fault;
But such a headstrong potent fault it is
With the same havior that your passion bears
Here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture.
Refuse it not, it hath no tongue to vex you;
And I beseech you come again tomorrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honor, saved, may upon asking give?
Nothing but this -- your true love for my master.
How with mine honor may I give him that 
Which I have given to you?  I will acquit you. 
Well, come again tomorrow. Fare thee well. 
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.  
Gentleman, God save thee! And you, sir.
That defense thou hast, betake thee to't.
Of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter? 
I know the knight is incensed against you,
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
I do assure you, 'tis against my will.
Put up your sword.  If this young gentleman
Have done offense, I take the fault on me;
If you offend him, I for him defy you. 
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more 
Than you have heard him brag to you he will. 
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.
Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
Marry, will I, sir; and for that I promised
No, sir, no jot.  I know your favor well,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.
Take him away, he knows I know him well.
I must obey.  This comes with seeking you;
But there's no remedy, I shall answer it. 
What will you do, now my necessity 
Makes me to ask you for my purse?  It grieves me
Much more for what I cannot do for you
Than what befalls myself.  You stand amazed,
I must entreat of you some of that money.
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
I'll lend you something. My having is not much;
I'll make division of my present with you.
Hold, there's half my coffer.  Will you deny me now?
Is't possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.  I know of none, 
Nor know I you by voice or any feature.
I hate ingratitude more in a man 
Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness, 
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.  O heavens themselves!
Let me speak a little.  This youth that you see here
I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,
Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
And to his image, which methought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
What's that to us?  The time goes by; away!
But O, how vild an idol proves this god!
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
In nature there's no blemish but the mind;
None can be called deformed but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly 
That he believes himself; so do not I.
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true, 
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you! 
Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian;
He named Sebastian.  I my brother know
Yet living in my glass; even such and so
In favor was my brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, color, ornament,
For him I imitate. O, if it prove,
Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love.
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow,
I prithee vent thy folly somewhere else,
I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. 
There's money for thee. If you tarry longer, 
Now, sir, have I met you again? There's for you. 
I will be free from thee.  What wouldst thou now?
If thou dar'st tempt me further, draw thy sword.
Hold, Toby, on thy life I charge thee hold!
Will it be ever thus?  Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
Where manners ne'er were preached! Out of my sight!
Be not offended, dear Cesario.
Rudesby, be gone!  I prithee, gentle friend, 
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
In this uncivil and unjust extent 
Against thy peace.  Go with me to my house, 
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this.  Thou shalt not choose but go;
Do not deny.  Beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine, in thee.
What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream.
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
Nay, come, I prithee.  Would thou'dst be ruled by me!
Madam, I will.  O, say so, and so be! 
This is the air, that is the glorious sun,
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't,
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio then?
I could not find him at the Elephant,
Yet there he was, and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out.
His counsel now might do me golden service, 
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness, 
Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune 
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust but that I am mad,
Or else the lady's mad; yet if 'twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take and give back affairs, and their dispatch,
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing
As I perceive she does. There's something in't
That is deceivable. But here the lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine.  If you mean well,
Now go with me, and with this holy man,
Into the chantry by; there, before him,
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
That my most jealious and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note, 
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth. What do you say? 
I'll follow this good man, and go with you, 
And having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way, good father, and heavens so shine 
That they may fairly note this act of mine!  
Now as thou lov'st me, let me see his letter.
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
Any thing.  Do not desire to see this letter.
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
I know thee well; how dost thou, my good fellow?
Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.
No, sir, the worse.  How can that be?
Thou shalt not be the worse for me, there's gold.
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
That face of his I do remember well,
Yet when I saw it last, it was besmeared
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.
A baubling vessel was he captain of, 
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,
With which such scathful grapple did he make 
With the most noble bottom of our fleet, 
That very envy, and the tongue of loss,
Cried fame and honor on him.  What's the matter?
Orsino, this is that Antonio
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.
Notable pirate, thou salt-water thief!
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies
Whom thou in terms so bloody and so dear
Hast made thine enemies?  Orsino, noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me.
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither: 
That most ingrateful boy there by your side
From the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth 
Did I redeem; a wrack past hope he was. 
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
My love, without retention or restraint,
All his in dedication.  For his sake
Did I expose myself (pure for his love)
Into the danger of this adverse town,
Drew to defend him when he was beset;
Where being apprehended, his false cunning
(Not meaning to partake with me in danger)
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use
Not half an hour before.  How can this be?
today, my lord; and for three months before,
No int'rim, not a minute's vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
Here comes the Countess, now heaven walks on earth. 
But for thee, fellow -- fellow, thy words are madness. 
Three months this youth hath tended upon me,
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord --
My lord would speak, my duty hushes me.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after music.  Still so cruel?
What, to perverseness?  You uncivil lady,
To whose ingrate and inauspicious altars
My soul the faithfull'st off'rings have breathed out
That e'er devotion tendered! What shall I do?
Even what it please my lord, that shall become him.
Why should I not (had I the heart to do it), 
Like to th' Egyptian thief at point of death, 
Kill what I love? (a savage jealousy
That sometime savors nobly), but hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screws me from my true place in your favor,
Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still.
But this your minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.
Come, boy, with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief.
I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love,
To spite a raven's heart within a dove.
And I most jocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
Where goes Cesario?  After him I love
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More by all mores than e'er I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above 
Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Ay me, detested! how am I beguiled! 
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thyself?  Is it so long?
Call forth the holy father.  Come, away!
Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.
Husband?  Ay, husband. Can he that deny?
Her husband, sirrah? No, my lord, not I.
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
That makes thee strangle thy propriety.
Fear not, Cesario, take thy fortunes up,
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear'st.  O, welcome, father!
Father, I charge thee by thy reverence
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness what occasion now 
Reveals before 'tis ripe, what thou dost know
Hath newly passed between this youth and me. 
A contract of eternal bond of love, 
Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strength'ned by interchangement of your rings,
And all the ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my function, by my testimony;
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
O thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be
When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet
Where thou and I (henceforth) may never meet.
My lord, I do protest -- O, do not swear!
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear. 
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.
You drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I bespake you fair, and hurt you not.
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman,
But had it been the brother of my blood, 
I must have done no less with wit and safety. 
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you.
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
We made each other but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural perspective, that is and is not!
Antonio, O my dear Antonio!
How have the hours racked and tortured me,
Sebastian are you?  Fear'st thou that, Antonio?
How have you made division of yourself?
An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
Nor can there be that deity in my nature
Of here and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured. 
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What countryman?  What name? What parentage? 
Of Messaline; Sebastian was my father, 
Such a Sebastian was my brother too;
So went he suited to his watery tomb.
If spirits can assume both form and suit,
You come to fright us.  A spirit I am indeed,
But am in that dimension grossly clad
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
O, that record is lively in my soul!
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both
But this my masculine usurped attire,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance 
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola -- which to confirm, 
I'll bring you to a captain in this town, 
Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
I was preserved to serve this noble count.
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
So comes it, lady, you have been mistook;
But Nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a maid,
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived,
You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed, right noble is his blood.
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wrack.
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
And all those sayings will I over swear,
And all those swearings keep as true in soul
As doth that orbed continent the fire
That severs day from night.  Give me thy hand, 
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
The captain that did bring me first on shore 
Hath my maid's garments.  He upon some action 
Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit,
A gentleman, and follower of my lady's.
He shall enlarge him; fetch Malvolio hither.
And yet, alas, now I remember me,
They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance clearly banished his.
The madly-used Malvolio." Did he write this?
Ay, madam.  This savors not much of distraction.
See him delivered, Fabian, bring him hither.
My lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister as a wife, 
One day shall crown th' alliance on't, so please you, 
Here at my house and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt t' embrace your offer.
Your master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me master for so long,
Here is my hand -- you shall from this time be
Your master's mistress.  A sister! you are she.
Is this the madman?  Ay, my lord, this same.
How now, Malvolio?  Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.  Have I, Malvolio? No.
Lady, you have. Pray you peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand; 
Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase,
Or say 'tis not your seal, not your invention. 
You can say none of this.  Well, grant it then, 
And tell me, in the modesty of honor,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favor,
Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
And acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious geck and gull
That e'er invention played on?  Tell me why!
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though I confess much like the character;
But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad. Then cam'st in smiling,
And in such forms which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee be content.
This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge 
Of thine own cause.  Good madam, hear me speak, 
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come 
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wond'red at.  In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him. Maria writ
The letter at Sir Toby's great importance,
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
How with a sportful malice it was followed
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you. 
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace;
He hath not told us of the captain yet.
When that is known, and golden time convents, 
A solemn combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Mean time, sweet sister, 
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come -- 
For so you shall be while you are a man;
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsino's mistress, and his fancy's queen.
