<trovs> In Troy, there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgillous, their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships 
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel war. Sixty and nine, that wore 
Their crownets regal, from th' Athenian bay 
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus' queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps -- and that's the quarrel.
And the deep-drawing [barks] do there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage. Now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions. Priam's six-gated city,
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And [Antenorides], with massy staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts
Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits,
On one and other side, Troyan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard -- and hither am I come,
A prologue armed, but not in confidence
Of author's pen or actor's voice, but suited
In like conditions as our argument,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play 
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle; starting thence away 
To what may be digested in a play. 
Like or find fault, do as your pleasures are,
Now good or bad,'tis but the chance of war.
Call here my varlet, I'll unarm again.
Why should I war without the walls of Troy,
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Troyan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field, Troilus, alas, hath none.
Will this gear ne'er be mended?
Greeks are strong, and skillful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant,
But I am weaker than a woman,s tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,
Less valiant than the virgin in the night,
And skilless as unpracticed infancy. 
Well, I have told you enough of this. For my
part, I'll not meddle nor make no farther. He that will 
have a cake out of the wheat must tarry the grinding. 
Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench at suff'rance than I do.
At Priam's royal table do I sit,
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts --
So, traitor, then she comes when she is thence.
Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever
I saw her look, or any woman else.
I was about to tell thee -- when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain, 
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
I have (as when the sun doth light a-scorn) 
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile, 
But sorrow that is couched in seeming gladness
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus --
When I do tell thee there my hopes lie drowned,
Reply not in how many fadoms deep
They lie indrenched. I tell thee I am mad
In Cressid's love; thou answer'st she is fair,
Pourest in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse, O, that her hand,
In whose comparison all whites are ink
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure
The cygnet's down is harsh, and spirit of sense 
Hard as the palm of ploughman. This thou tell'st me,
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her, 
But saying thus, in stead of oil and balm, 
Thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me
The knife that made it. I speak no more than truth.
Peace, you ungracious clamors! peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides, Helen must needs the fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her
I cannot fight upon this argument;
It is too starved a subject for my sword.
But Pandarus -- O gods! how do you plague me!
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar,
And he's as teachy to be wooed to woo,
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we:
Her bed is India, there she lies, a pearl;
Between our Ilium and where she [resides], 
Let it be called the wild and wand'ring flood,
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar 
Our doubtful hope, our convoy, and our bark. 
How now, Prince Troilus, wherefore not a-field? 
Because not there. This woman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to be from thence.
What news, Aeneas, from the field today?
Paris is returned home and hurt.
By whom, Aeneas?  Troilus, by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed,'tis but a scar to scorn;
Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn. 
Hark what good sport is out of town today.
Better at home, if "would I might" were may.
But to the sport abroad -- are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.  Come go we then together. 
Who were those went by?  Queen Hecuba and Helen.
And whither go they?  Up to the eastern tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
To see the battle. Hector, whose patience
Is as a virtue fixed, today was moved:
He chid Andromache and strook his armorer,
And like as there were husbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he was harnessed light,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did as a prophet weep what it foresaw
In Hector's wrath.  What was his cause of anger?
noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks
A lord of Troyan blood, nephew to Hector,
They call him Ajax.  Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very man per se and stands alone. 
Hector was gone, but Helen was not up.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
O Jupiter, there's no comparison.
What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do
Ay, if I ever saw him be fore and knew him. 
Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
Then you say as I say, for I am sure 
No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees. 
'Tis just to each of them; he is himself.
Himself? alas, poor Troilus, I would he were!
Condition I had gone bare foot to India.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice,
He offers in another's enterprise,
But more in Troilus thousand fold I see
Than in the glass of pandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing:
Things won are done, joy's soul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knows nought that knows not this:
Men prize the thing ungained more than it is.
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
Achievement is command; ungained, beseech;
Then though my heart's content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
What grief hath set these jaundies o'er your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs begun on earth below
Fails in the promised largeness. Checks and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared,
As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infects the sound pine, and diverts his grain
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
That we come short of our suppose so far
That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand,
Sith [every] action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gave't surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abashed behold our works, 
And call them shames which are indeed nought else
But the protractive trials of great Jove 
To find persistive constancy in men? 
The fineness of which metal is not found
In fortune's love; for then the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
The hard and soft, seem all affined and kin;
But in the wind and tempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away,
And what hath mass or matter, by itself
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
With due observance of [thy] godlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail
Upon her [patient] breast, making their way
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong-ribbed bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements, 
Like Perseus' horse. Where's then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimbered sides but even now 
Corrivalled greatness? Either to harbor fled, 
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so
Doth valor's show and valor's worth divide
In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
Than by the tiger; but when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
And flies fled under shade, why then the thing 
As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in self-same key
Retires to chiding fortune.  Agamemnon,
Thou great commander, nerves and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only sprite
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.
Besides th' applause and approbation
which, most mighty for thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend for stretched-out life,
I give to both your speeches, which were such 
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece 
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
As venerable Nestor, hatched in silver,
Should with a bond of air strong as the axle-tree
On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Speak, prince of Ithaca, and be't of less expect 
That matter needless, of importless burthen,
Divide thy lips, than we are confident,
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,
We shall hear music, wit, and oracle.]
Troy, yet upon his bases, had been down,
And the great Hector's sword had lacked a master,
The specialty of rule hath been neglected,
And look how many Grecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
When that the general is not like the hive
To whom the foragers shall all repair, 
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
Th' unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask. 
The heavens themselves, the planets, and this centre 
Observe degree, priority, and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office, and custom, in all line of order;
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other; whose med'cinable eye
Corrects the [ill aspects] of [planets evil],
And posts like the commandment of a king,
Sans check, to good and bad. But when the planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues and what portents, what mutiny!
What raging of the sea, shaking of earth!
Commotion in the winds! frights, changes, horrors
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity and married calm of states
Quite from their fixure! O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder of all high designs,
The enterprise is sick. How could communities,
Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores, 
The primogenity and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels, 
But by degree stand in authentic place? 
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And hark what discord follows. Each thing [meets]
In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe;
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead;
Force should be right, or rather, right and wrong
(Between whose endless jar justice resides)
Should lose their names, and so should justice too!
Then every thing include itself in power,
Power into will, will into appetite,
And appetite, an universal wolf
(So doubly seconded with will and power),
Must make per force an universal prey,
And last eat up himself. Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree is suffocate,
And this neglection of degree it is
That by a pace goes backward with a purpose 
It hath to climb. The general's disdained
By him one step below, he by the next, 
That next by him beneath; so every step, 
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
Of pale and bloodless emulation,
And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discovered
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
The sinow and the forehand of our host,
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs. With him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
And with ridiculous and [awkward] action,
Which, slanderer, he imitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon, 
Thy topless deputation he puts on,
And like a strutting player, whose conceit 
Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich 
To hear the wooden dialogue and sound
'Twixt his stretched footing and the scaffolage,
Such to-be-pitied and o'er-wrested seeming
He acts thy greatness in; and when he speaks,
'Tis like a chime a-mending, with terms [unsquared],
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped
Would seem hyperboles. At this fusty stuff
The large Achilles, on his pressed bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause,
Cries,"Excellent!'tis Agamemnon right!
Now play me Nestor, hem, and stroke thy beard,
As he being dressed to some oration."
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife;
Yet god Achilles still cries,"Excellent!
'Tis Nestor right. Now play him me, Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night alarm."
And then forsooth the faint defects of age
Must be the scene of mirth; to cough and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his gorget, 
Shake in and out the rivet; and at this sport
Sir Valor dies; cries,"O, enough, Patroclus, 
Or give me ribs of steel! I shall split all 
In pleasure of my spleen." And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is or is not, serves 
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain -- 
Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns 
With an imperial voice -- many are infect.
Ajax is grown self-willed, and bears his head
In such a rein, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him,
Makes factious feasts, rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites,
A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken [or] discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy, and call it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand. The still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil the enemies' weight --
Why, this hath not a finger's dignity.
They call this bed-work, mapp'ry, closet-war,
So that the ram that batters down the wall, 
For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine, 
Or those that with the fineness of their souls 
By reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse
Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you.
May one that is a herald and a prince
Do a fair message to his kingly eyes?
With surety stronger than Achilles' arm,
'Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon head and general.
Fair leave and large security. How may
A stranger to those most imperial looks
Know them from eyes of other mortals?  How? 
I ask, that I might waken reverence, 
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush 
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes
Which is that god in office, guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Troyan scorns us, or the men of Troy
Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarmed,
As bending angels; that's their [fame] in peace.
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, and, great Jove's accord,
Nothing so fall of heart. But peace, Aeneas,
Peace, Troyan, lay thy finger on thy lips!
The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth;
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows, that praise, sole pure, transcends.
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself Aeneas?
Sir, pardon,'tis for Agamemnon's ears. 
He hears nought privately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him. 
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his [sense] on [the] attentive bent,
And then to speak.  Speak frankly as the wind,
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour.
That thou shalt know, Troyan, he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.  Trumpet, blow [loud],
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents,
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
A prince called Hector -- Priam is his father --
Who in [this] dull and long-continued truce
Is resty grown. He bade me take a trumpet,
And to this purpose speak: kings, princes, lords! 
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
That holds his honor higher than his ease, 
And [seeks] his praise more than he fears his peril, 
That knows his valor, and knows not his fear,
That loves his mistress more than in confession
With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
And dare avow her beauty and her worth
In other arms than hers -- to him this challenge!
Hector, in view of Troyans and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it:
He hath a lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Than ever Greek did couple in his arms,
And will tomorrow with his trumpet call,
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love.
If any come, Hector shall honor him;
If none, he'll say in Troy when he retires,
The Grecian dames are sunburnt, and not worth
The splinter of a lance. Even so much.
This shall be told our lovers, Lord Aeneas.
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home. But we are soldiers,
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove, 
That means not, hath not, or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath, [or] means to be, 
That one meets Hector; if none else, I am he. 
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hector's grandsire sucked. He is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian [mould]
A noble man that hath no spark of fire
To answer for his love, tell him from me
I'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver,
And in my vambrace put my withered brawns,
And meeting him [will] tell him that my lady
Was fairer than his grandam, and as chaste
As may be in the world. His youth in flood,
I'll prove this troth with my three drops of blood.
Now heavens forfend such scarcity of [youth] !
Fair Lord Aeneas, let me touch your hand;
To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent.
Yourself shall feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a noble foe. 
I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
Blunt wedges rive hard knots; the seeded pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles must or now be cropped,
Or shedding, breed a nursery of like evil,
To overbulk us all.  Well, and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
However it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
True, the purpose is perspicuous as substance,
Whose grossness little characters sum up;
And in the publication make no strain
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Libya (though, Apollo knows, 
'Tis dry enough), will with great speed of judgment,
Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose 
Why,'tis most meet; who may you else oppose
That can from Hector bring those honors off,
If not Achilles? Though't be a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells;
For here the Troyans taste our dear'st repute
With their fin'st palate; and trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
In this vild action, for the success,
Although particular, shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general,
And in such indexes (although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes) there is seen
The baby figure of the giant mass
Of things to come at large. It is supposed
He that meets Hector issues from our choice,
And choice (being mutual act of all our souls)
Makes merit her election, and doth boil
(As 'twere from forth us all) a man distilled 
Out of our virtues, who miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence a conquering part 
To steel a strong opinion to themselves? 
[Which entertained, limbs are his instruments,
In no less working than are swords and bows
Directive by the limbs.  Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector.
Let us like merchants first show foul wares,
And think perchance they'll sell; if not,
The lustre of the better shall exceed
By showing the worse first. Do not consent
That ever Hector and Achilles meet,
For both our honor and our shame in this
Are dogged with two strange followers.
I see them not with my old eyes, what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we all should share with him.
But he already is too insolent;
And it were better parch in Afric sun
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes, 
Should he scape Hector fair. If he were foiled,
Why then we do our main opinion crush 
In taint of our best man. No, make a lott'ry, 
And by device let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector; among ourselves
Give him allowance for the better man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
We'll dress him up in voices; if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still
That we have better men. But hit or miss,
Our project's life this shape of sense assumes:
Ajax employed plucks down Achilles' plumes.
Now, Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice,
And I will give a taste thereof forthwith
To Agamemnon. Go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame each other; pride alone
Must [tarre] the mastiffs on, as 'twere a bone.
Agamemnon, how if he had biles -- fall, all
Then would come some matter from him; I
Thou bitch-wolf's son, canst thou not hear?
Feel then. The plague of Greece upon thee, thou 
Marry, this, sir, is proclaimed through all our host:
That Hector, by the [fift] hour of the sun, 
Will with a trumpet 'twixt our tents and Troy 
tomorrow morning call some knight to arms
That hath a stomach, and such a one that dare
Maintain -- I know not what,'tis trash. Farewell.
I know not,'tis put to lott'ry. Otherwise,
O, meaning you? I will go learn more of it. 
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
"Deliver Helen, and all damage else --
As honor, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this cormorant war -- 
Shall be strook off." Hector, what say you to't?
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I 
As far as toucheth my particular, 
There is no lady of more softer bowels,
More spungy to suck in the sense of fear,
More ready to cry out,"Who knows what follows?"
Than Hector is. The wound of peace is [surety],
[Surety] secure, but modest doubt is call,d
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
To th' bottom of the worst. Let Helen go.
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul,'mongst many thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear as Helen; I mean, of ours.
If we have lost so many tenths of ours,
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us
(Had it our name) the value of one ten,
What merit's in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up?  Fie, fie, my brother!
Weigh you the worth and honor of a king
So great as our dread father's in a scale
Of common ounces? Will you with compters sum 
The past-proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waist most fathomless 
With spans and inches so diminutive 
As fears and reasons? Fie, for godly shame!
No marvel though you bite so sharp [at] reasons,
You are so empty of them. Should not our father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reason,
Because your speech hath none that tell him so?
You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest,
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are your reasons:
You know an enemy intends you harm;
You know a sword employed is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who marvels then, when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Or like a star disorbed? Nay, if we talk of reason,
[Let's] shut our gates and sleep. Manhood and honor
Should have hare hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
With this crammed reason; reason and respect 
Make livers pale and lustihood deject. 
Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost
The keeping.  What's aught but as 'tis valued?
But value dwells not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself
As in the prizer. 'Tis mad idolatry
To make the service greater than the god,
And the will dotes that is attributive
To what infectiously itself affects,
Without some image of th' affected merit.
I take today a wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my will,
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous [shores]
Of will and judgment: how may I avoid
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The wife I chose? There can be no evasion
To blench from this and to stand firm by honor.
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant 
When we have soiled them, nor the remainder viands
We do not throw in unrespective sieve, 
Because we now are full. It was thought meet 
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks.
Your breath with full consent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce,
And did him service; he touched the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes pale the morning.
Why keep we her? The Grecians keep our aunt.
Is she worth keeping? Why, she is a pearl,
Whose price hath launched above a thousand ships,
And turned crowned kings to merchants.
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went --
As you must needs, for you all cried"Go, go" --
If you'll confess [he] brought home worthy prize --
As you must needs, for you all clapped your hands,
And cried"Inestimable!" -- why do you now
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that never Fortune did,
Beggar the estimation which yo
Richer than sea and land? O theft most base 
That we have stol'n what we do
But thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n, 
That in their country did them that disgrace 
We fear to warrant in our native place!
Cry, Troyans, cry!  What noise? what shrike is this?
'Tis our mad sister, I do know her voice.
Cry, Troyans, cry! lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled [eld],
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
Add to my clamors! Let us pay betimes
A moi'ty of that mass of moan to come.
Cry, Troyans, cry! practice your eyes with tears!
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand.
Our fire-brand brother Paris burns us all.
Cry, Troyans, cry! a Helen and a woe!
Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go. 
Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our sister work
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood
So madly hot that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?  Why, brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act 
Such and no other than event doth form it,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds 
Because Cassandra's mad. Her brain-sick raptures 
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
Which hath our several honors all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched than all Priam's sons;
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
Else might the world convince of levity
As well my undertakings as your counsels,
But I attest the gods, your fall consent
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what, alas, can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valor
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power as I have will,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.   Paris, you speak
Like one besotted on your sweet delights. 
You have the honey still, but these the gall; 
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it,
But I would have the soil of her fair rape
Wiped off, in honorable keeping her.
What treason were it to the ransacked queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion! Can it be
That so degenerate a strain as this
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended; nor none so noble
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death unfamed,
Where Helen is the subject. Then I say,
Well may we fight for her whom we know well
world's large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand 
Have glozed, but superficially, not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought 
Unfit to hear moral philosophy. 
The reasons you allege do more conduce
To the hot passion of distemp'red blood
Than to make up a free determination
'Twixt right and wrong; for pleasure and revenge
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be rend'red to their owners: now,
What nearer debt in all humanity
Than wife is to the husband? If this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds, of partial indulgence
To their benumbed wills, resist the same,
There is a law in each well-ordered nation
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refractory.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's king,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
Of nature and of nations speak aloud
To have her back returned. Thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong, 
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
Is this in way of truth; yet ne'er the less, 
My spritely brethren, I propend to you 
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependance
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why, there you touched the life of our design!
Were it not glory that we more affected
Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Troyan blood
Spent more in her defense. But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honor and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us,
For I presume brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory
As smiles upon the forehead of this action
For the wide world's revenue.  I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus.
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
dull and factious nobles of the Greeks 
Will [strike] amazement to their drowsy spirits.
I was advertised their great general slept, 
Whilst emulation in the army crept: 
Within his tent, but ill disposed, my lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here.
He [shent] our messengers, and we lay by
Our appertainings, visiting of him.
Let him be told so, lest perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
We saw him at the opening of his tent,
Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart. You may
Here comes Patroclus. No Achilles with him. 
The elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy;
his legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry,
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness and this noble state
To call upon him. He hopes it is no other
But for your health and your disgestion sake,
An after-dinner's breath.  Hear you, Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers,
But his evasion, winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly our apprehensions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him; yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea, like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him
We come to speak with him, and you shall not sin 
If you do say we think him over-proud
And under-honest, in self-assumption greater 
Than in the note of judgment; and worthier than 
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command,
And underwrite in an observing kind
His humorous predominance; yea, watch
His [pettish lines], his ebbs, [his] flows, [as] if
The passage and whole [carriage of this action]
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he overhold his price so much,
We'll none of him; but let him, like an engine
Not portable, lie under this report:
"Bring action hither, this cannot go to war."
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give
Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.
I shall, and bring his answer presently. 
In second voice we'll not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him. Ulysses, 
[enter you]. What is he more than another?
Is he so much? Do you not think he thinks
himself a better man than I am?  No question. 
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
Achilles will not to the field tomorrow.
What's his excuse?   He doth rely on none,
But carries on the stream of his dispose 
Without observance or respect of any, 
In will peculiar and in self-admission.
Why will he not upon our fair request
Untent his person and share th' air with us?
Things small as nothing, for request's sake only,
He makes important. Possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride
That quarrels at self-breath. Imagined worth
Holds in his blood such swoll'n and hot discourse
That 'twixt his mental and his active parts
Kingdomed Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters down himself. What should I say?
He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it
Cry "No recovery."  Let Ajax go to him.
Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent.
'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not be so!
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes 
When they go from Achilles. Shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam, 
And never suffers matter of the world 
Enter his thoughts, save such as doth revolve
And ruminate himself, shall he be worshipped
Of that we hold an idol more than he?
No! this thrice worthy and right valiant lord
Shall not so [stale] his palm, nobly acquired,
Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
As amply [titled] as Achilles' is,
That were to enlard his fat-already pride,
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
With entertaining great Hyperion.
This lord go to him! Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder, "Achilles go to him."
O, this is well. He rubs the vein of him.
And how his silence drinks up his applause!
If I go to him, with my armed fist
And he be proud with me, I'll pheese his pride. 
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
The raven chides blackness. I'll [let] his [humors] blood.
He will be the physician that should be the patient.
'A should not bear it so, 'a should eat swords
first. Shall pride carry it? And 'twould, you'd carry half.
My lord, you feed too much on this dislike.
Our noble general, do not do so. 
You must prepare to fight without Achilles. 
Why, 'tis this naming of him does him harm.
Here is a man -- but 'tis before his face,
I will be silent.  Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant --
A whoreson dog, that shall palter with us thus!
Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet composure.
Praise him that gat thee, she that gave thee suck;
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed beyond, [beyond] all erudition;
But he that disciplined thine arms to fight, 
Let Mars divide eternity in twain,
And give him half; and for thy vigor, 
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield 
To sinowy Ajax. I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a [bourn], a pale, a shore, confines
[Thy] spacious and dilated parts. Here's Nestor,
Instructed by the antiquary times;
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise.
But pardon, father Nestor, were your days
As green as Ajax', and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Ajax.  Shall I call you father?
Ay, my good son.  Be ruled by him, Lord Ajax.
There is no tarrying here, the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general
To call together all his state of war.
Fresh kings are come to Troy; tomorrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast;
And here's a lord -- come knights from east to west,
And [cull] their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep: 
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep. 
They're come from the field. Let us to Priam's hall
To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
To help unarm our Hector. His stubborn buckles,
With [these] your white enchanting fingers touched,
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel,
Or force of Greekish sinews. You shall do more
Than all the island kings -- disarm great Hector.
'Twill make us proud to be his servant, Paris!
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have,
No, sir, [he] stays for you to conduct him thither.
No, Pandarus, I stalk about her door,
Like to a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to these fields
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds
Proposed for the deserver! O gentle Pandar,
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings,
Walk here i' th' orchard, I'll bring her straight. 
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round;
Th' imaginary relish is so sweet 
That it enchants my sense; what will it be, 
When that the wat'ry palates taste indeed
Love's thrice-repured nectar? Death, I fear me,
Sounding destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtile, potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness
For the capacity of my ruder powers.
I fear it much, and I do fear besides
That I shall lose distinction in my joys,
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
O Cressid, how often have I wished me thus!
Wished, my lord? The gods grant -- O my lord!
[What should they grant? What makes this
pretty abruption? What too curious dreg espies my}
sweet lady in the fountain of our love?
More dregs than water, if my [fears] have eyes.
Fears make devils of cherubins, they never
Blind fear that seeing reason leads finds
safer footing than blind reason stumbling without fear.
To fear the worst oft cures the worse.
O, let my lady apprehend no fear. In all
Cupid's pageant there is presented no monster.
Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day
Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won; but I was won, my lord,
With the first glance that ever -- pardon me,
If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.
I love you now, but till now not so much
But I might master it. In faith I lie,
My thoughts were like unbridled children grown
Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools!
Why have I blabbed? Who shall be true to us,
When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
But though I loved you well, I wooed you not,
And yet, good faith, I wished myself a man,
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent. See, see, your silence, 
[Cunning] in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of counsel! Stop my mouth. 
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence. 
My lord, I do beseech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss.
I am ashamed. O heavens, what have I done!
For this time will I take my leave, my lord.
Leave! And you take leave till tomorrow morning --
Pray you content you. What offends you, lady?
Sir, mine own company. You cannot shun yourself.
I have a kind of self resides with you;
But an unkind self, that itself will leave
To be another's fool. I would be gone.
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak.
Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely. 
Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love, 
And fell so roundly to a large confession, 
To angle for your thoughts, but you are wise,
Or else you love not; for to be wise and love
Exceeds man's might; that dwells with gods above.
O that I thought it could be in a woman --
As, if it can, I will presume in you --
To feed for [aye] her lamp and flames of love,
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Outliving beauties outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter than blood decays!
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me
That my integrity and truth to you
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowed purity in love!
How were I then uplifted! but alas,
I am as true as truth's simplicity,
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that I'll war with you.  O virtuous fight,
When right with right wars who shall be most right!
True swains in love shall in the world to come 
Approve their truth by Troilus. When their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare, 
Wants similes, truth tired with iteration, 
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon,
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,
As iron to adamant, as earth to th' centre,
[Yet] after all comparisons of truth
(As truth's authentic author to be cited)
"As true as Troilus" shall crown up the verse,
And sanctify the numbers.  Prophet may you be!
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old [and] hath forgot itself,
When water-drops have worn the stones of Troy,
And blind oblivion swallowed cities up,
And mighty states characterless are grated
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From false to false among false maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood! When th' have said as false
As air, as water, wind, or sandy earth,
As fox to lamb, or wolf to heifer's calf,
Pard to the hind, or step-dame to her son,
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood, 
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear! 
Now, princes, for the service I have done, 
Th' advantage of the time prompts me aloud
To call for recompense. Appear it to [your] mind, 
That through the sight I bear in things to [come], 
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession,
Incurred a traitor's name, exposed myself
From certain and possessed conveniences
To doubtful fortunes, sequest'ring from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom, and condition
Made tame and most familiar to my nature;
And here, to do you service, am become
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit
Out of those many regist'red in promise,
Which you say live to come in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us, Troyan? Make demand.
You have a Troyan prisoner called Antenor,
Yesterday took; Troy holds him very dear.
Oft have you (often have you thanks therefore)
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange,
Whom Troy hath still denied, but this Antenor,
I know, is such a wrest in their affairs 
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage, and they will almost 
Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam, 
In change of him. Let him be sent, great princes,
And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.  Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressid hither; Calchas shall have
What he requests of us. Good Diomed,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange;
Withal bring word if Hector will tomorrow
Be answered in his challenge: Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burthen
Achilles stands i' th' entrance of his tent.
Please it our general pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot, and, princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him.
I will come last; 'tis like he'll question me 
If so, I have derision medicinable 
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink.
It may do good, pride hath no other glass
To show itself but pride; for supple knees
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees.
We'll execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along.
So do each lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
Than if not looked on. I will lead the way.
What comes the general to speak with me?
You know my mind, I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy.
What says Achilles? Would he aught with us?
Would you, my lord, aught with the general? No.
Nothing, my lord. The better. Good day, good day.
How do you? how do you?  What, does the cuckold scorn me?
How now, Patroclus? Good morrow, Ajax. Ha?
What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles? 
They pass by strangely. They were used to bend,
To send their smiles before them to Achilles,
To come as humbly as they used to creep
To holy altars.  What, am I poor of late?
'Tis certain, greatness, once fall'n out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too. What the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall; for men, like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,
And not a man, for being simply man,
Hath any honor, but honor for those honors
That are without him, as place, riches, and favor --
Prizes of accident as oft as merit, 
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers,
The love that leaned on them as slippery too, 
Doth one pluck down another, and together 
Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me,
Fortune and I are friends. I do enjoy
At ample point all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks, who do methinks find out
Some thing not worth in me such rich beholding
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses,
I'll interrupt his reading. How now, Ulysses?
Now, great Thetis' son! What are you reading?
Writes me that man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath,
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection;
As when his virtues, aiming upon others,
Heat them, and they retort that heat again
To the first [giver].  This is not strange, Ulysses.
The beauty that is borne here in the face 
The bearer knows not, but commends itself
To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself, 
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,
Not going from itself; but eye to eye opposed,
Salutes each other with each other's form;
For speculation turns not to itself,
Till it hath travelled and is [mirrored] there 
Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all.
I do not strain at the position -- 
It is familiar -- but at the author's drift, 
Who in his circumstance expressly proves
That no man is the lord of any thing,
Though in and of him there be much consisting,
Till he communicate his parts to others;
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught,
Till he behold them formed in th' applause
Where th' are extended; who like an arch reverb'rate
The voice again, or like a gate of steel,
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
His figure and his heat. I was much rapt in this,
And apprehended here immediately
Heavens, what a man is there! A very horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things
Most [abject] in regard, and dear in use!
What things again most dear in the esteem,
And poor in worth! Now shall we see tomorrow --
An act that very chance doth throw upon him --
Ajax renowned! O heavens, what some men do, 
How some men creep in skittish Fortune's hall, 
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes! 
How one man eats into another's pride,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
To see these Grecian lords! -- why, even already
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast,
I do believe it, for they passed by me
As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me
Good word nor look. What, are my deeds forgot?
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
A great-sized monster of ingratitudes.
Those scraps are good deeds past, which are devoured
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
As done. Perseverance, dear my lord
Keeps honor bright; to have done is to hang.
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail
In monumental mock'ry. Take the instant way,
For honor travels in a strait so narrow,
Where one but goes abreast. Keep then the path, 
For emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue. If you give way, 
Or [hedge] aside from the direct forthright, 
Like to an ent'red tide, they all rush by
[Or like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject [rear],
O'errun and trampled on.] Then what they do in present,
Though less than yours in [past], must o'ertop yours;
For Time is like a fashionable host
That slightly shakes his parting guest by th' hand,
And with his arms outstretched as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer. The welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. Let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was;
High birth, vigor of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
To envious and calumniating Time.
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And [give] to dust, that is a little gilt, 
The present eye praises the present object. 
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man, 
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
what stirs not. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
And case thy reputation in thy tent,
Whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves,
Of this my privacy I have strong reasons.
The reasons are more potent and heroical.
'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love
Knows almost every [grain of Pluto's gold],
Finds bottom in th' uncomprehensive depth, 
Keeps place with thought and almost, like the gods,
Do thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles. 
There is a mystery (with whom relation 
Durst never meddle) in the soul of state,
Which hath an operation more divine
Than breath or pen can give expressure to.
All the commerce that you have had with Troy
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord,
And better would it fit Achilles much
To throw down Hector than Polyxena.
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home,
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,
"Great Hector's sister did Achilles win,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him."
Farewell, my lord; I as your lover speak:
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.
To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you.
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action. I stand condemned for this;
They think my little stomach to the war, 
And you great love to me, restrains you thus.
Sweet, rouse yourself, and the weak wanton Cupid 
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold, 
And like [a] dewdrop from the lion's mane,
Be shook to air.  Shall Ajax fight with Hector?
Ay, and perhaps receive much honor by him.
I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrowdly gored.  O then beware!
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves.
Omission to do what is necessary
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when they sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus.
I'll send the fool to Ajax and desire him
T' invite the Troyan lords after the combat
To see us here unarmed. I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view.   A labor saved! 
During all question of the gentle truce; 
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance 
As heart can think or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces.
Our bloods are now in calm, and, so long, health!
[But] when contention and occasion meet,
By Jove I'll play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit, and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a lion that will fly
With his face backward. In humane gentleness,
Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life, 
Welcome indeed! By Venus' hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort 
The thing he means to kill, more excellently. 
We sympathize. Jove, let Aeneas live,
If to my sword his fate be not the glory,
A thousand complete courses of the sun!
But in mine emulous honor let him die,
With every joint a wound, and that tomorrow!
We do, and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.
I was sent for to the King, but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you; 'twas to bring this Greek
To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid.
Let's have your company, or if you please,
Haste there before us. I constantly believe
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troilus lodges there tonight.
Rouse him and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality wherefore. I fear 
We shall be much unwelcome.  That I assure you. 
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece 
Than Cressid borne from Troy.  There is no help.
The bitter disposition of the time
Will have it so. On, lord, we'll follow you.
And tell me, noble Diomed -- faith, tell me true,
Even in soul of sound good-fellowship --
Who, in your thoughts, deserves fair Helen best,
Myself, or Menelaus?  Both alike.
He merits well to have her that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soil,
With such a hell of pain and world of charge;
And you as well to keep her that defend her,
Not palating the taste of her dishonor,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends.
He like a puling cuckold would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece;
You like a lecher out of whorish loins
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors. 
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more,
But he as he, the heavier for a whore. 
You are too bitter to your country-woman. 
She's bitter to her country. Hear me, Paris:
For every false drop in her bawdy veins,
A Grecian's life hath sunk; for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Troyan hath been slain. Since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath
As for her Greeks and Troyans suff'red death.
Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that they desire to buy,
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
We'll not commend what we intend to sell.
Dear, trouble not yourself, the morn is cold.
Then, sweet my lord, I'll call mine uncle down, 
He shall unbolt the gates.  Trouble him not; 
To bed, to bed. Sleep kill those pretty eyes, 
And give as soft attachment to thy senses
As infants empty of all thought!  Good morrow then.
I prithee now to bed.  Are you a-weary of me?
O Cressida! but that the busy day,
Waked by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
I would not from thee.  Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
With wings more momentary-swift than thought.
You will catch cold and curse me.  Prithee tarry,
O foolish Cressid! I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark, there's one up.
What's all the doors open here?  It is your uncle.
A pestilence on him! now will he be mocking.
Here, you maid! where's my cousin Cressid?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle!
You bring me to do -- and then you flout me too.
To do what, to do what? let her say what.
Come, you are deceived, I think of no such thing. 
How earnestly they knock! Pray you come in. 
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
Who's there? What's the matter? Will you
beat down the door? How now, what's the matter?
Who's there? My Lord Aeneas! By my troth,
I knew you not. What news with you so early?
Come, he is here, my lord, do not deny him.
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here, say you? It's more than I know,
I'll be sworn. For my own part, I came in late. 
My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash. There is at hand
Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor
Delivered to [us]; and [for him] forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand
The Lady Cressida.  Is it so concluded?
By Priam and the general state of Troy.
They are at hand and ready to effect it.
I will go meet them; and, my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance, you did not find me here.
Good, good, my lord, the secrets of neighbor Pandar
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Is't possible? No sooner got but lost? The
devil take Antenor! the young prince will go mad.
A plague upon Antenor! I would they had broke 's neck!
How now? what's the matter? who was here? Ah, ah! 
Why sigh you so profoundly? Where's my lord? 
Gone? Tell me, sweet uncle, what's the matter?
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am
O poor gentleman! A plague upon Antenor!
Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees 
O you immortal gods! I will not go.
I will not, uncle. I have forgot my father,
I know no touch of consanguinity;
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul so near me 
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine,
Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood, 
If ever she leave Troilus! Time, force, and death, 
Do to this body what extremes you can;
But the strong base and building of my love
Is as the very centre of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I'll go in and weep.
Tear my bright hair, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart,
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefixed
For her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
Tell you the lady what she is to do,
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently;
And to his hand when I deliver her, 
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus 
A priest there off'ring to it his own heart. 
And would, as I shall pity, I could help!
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect, that I taste,
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affections,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like allayment could I give my grief:
My love admits no qualifying dross,
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.
Here, here, here he comes. [Ah], sweet ducks! O Troilus, 
What a pair of spectacles is here! Let me
embrace too. "O heart," as the goodly saying is,
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
A hateful truth.   What, and from Troilus too? 
From Troy and Troilus.  Is't possible?
And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back leave-taking, justles roughly by
All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure, forcibly prevents
Our locked embrasures, strangles our dear vows
Even in the birth of our own laboring breath.
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
Injurious time now with a robber's haste
Crams his rich thiev'ry up, he knows not how.
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu;
And scants us with a single famished kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
Hark, you are called. Some say the Genius [so] 
Cries ["come"] to him that instantly must die.
-- Bid them have patience, she shall come anon. 
Where are my tears? Rain, to lay this wind, 
or my heart will be blown up by [th' root]. 
I must then to the Grecians?  No remedy.
A woeful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks!
Hear me, love. Be thou but true of heart --
I true? How now? what wicked deem is this?
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
I speak not "be thou true" as fearing thee,
For I will throw my glove to Death himself
That there is no maculation in thy heart;
But "be thou true" say I to fashion in
My sequent protestation: be thou true,
O, you shall be exposed, my lord, to dangers
As infinite as imminent! but I'll be true.
And I'll grow friend with danger. Wear this sleeve.
And you this glove. When shall I see you? 
I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation. 
But yet be true.  O heavens, "be true" again?
The Grecian youths are full of quality;
[Their loving well composed with gift of nature,
Flowing] and swelling o'er with arts and exercise.
How novelty may move, and parts with [person],
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy
(Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin)
Makes me afeard.  O heavens, you love me not.
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit. I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtile games -- fair virtues all,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant --
But I can tell that in each grace of these
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil
That tempts most cunningly, but be not tempted. 
But something may be done that we will not, 
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changeful potency.
Nay, good my lord!  Come kiss, and let us part.
Brother Troilus!  Good brother, come you hither,
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
Who, I? Alas, it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
Is "plain and true"; there's all the reach of it.
Welcome, Sir Diomed! Here is the lady 
Which for Antenor we deliver you.
At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand, 
And by the way possess thee what she is. 
Entreat her fair, and, by my soul, fair Greek,
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword,
Name Cressid, and thy life shall be as safe
As priam is in Ilion.  Fair Lady Cressid,
So please you, save the thanks this prince expects.
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage, and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition to thee
In praising her. I tell thee, lord of Greece,
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises
As thou unworthy to be called her servant.
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge;
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
I'll cut thy throat.  O, be not moved, Prince Troilus.
Let me be privileged by my place and message, 
To be a speaker free. When I am hence,
I'll answer to my lust, and know you, lord, 
I'll nothing do on charge. To her own worth 
She shall be prized; but that you say, "Be 't so,"
I speak it in my spirit and honor, "No."
Come, to the port. I'll tell thee, Diomed,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.
Lady, give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Hark, Hector's trumpet!  How have we spent this morning!
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That swore to ride before him to the field.
'Tis Troilus' fault. Come, come, to field with him.
Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels.
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
On his fair worth and single chivalry.] 
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great combatant,
And hale him hither.  Thou, trumpet, there's my purse.
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe.
Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek
Outswell the colic of puffed Aquilon;
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood;
Thou blowest for Hector. No trumpet answers.
Is not yond Diomed, with Calchas' daughter?
'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait,
He rises on the toe. That spirit of his 
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressid?  Even she. 
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady. 
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular,
'Twere better she were kissed in general.
And very courtly counsel. I'll begin.
I'll take that winter from your lips, fair lady;
I had good argument for kissing once.
But that's no argument for kissing now,
For thus popped Paris in his hardiment,
And parted thus you and your argument. 
O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns,
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns!
The first was Menelaus' kiss, this, mine;
Patroclus kisses you.  O, this is trim!
Paris and I kiss evermore for him. 
I'll have my kiss, sir. Lady, by your leave.
In kissing, do you render or receive? 
Both take and give.  I'll make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better than you give;
I'll give you boot, I'll give you three for one.
You are an odd man, give even or give none.
An odd man, lady? Every man is odd.
No, Paris is not, for you know 'tis true
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me a' th' head.  No, I'll be sworn.
It were no match, your nail against his horn.
May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
You may.  I do desire it.  Why, beg then.
Why then for Venus' sake, give me a kiss
When Helen is a maid again and his.
I am your debtor, claim it when 'tis due.
Never's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady, a word. I'll bring you to your father. 
A woman of quick sense.   Fie, fie upon her! 
There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip,
Nay, her foot speaks; her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body.
O, these encounterers, so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome ere it comes,
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
To every ticklish reader! set them down
For sluttish spoils of opportunity,
And daughters of the game. The Troyans' trumpet.
Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose
A victor shall be known? Will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall they be divided 
By any voice or order of the field?
Hector bade ask.  Which way would Hector have it? 
He cares not, he'll obey conditions.
'Tis done like Hector.  But securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal misprising
The knight opposed.  If not Achilles, sir,
What is your name?  If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles, but what e'er, know this: 
In the extremity of great and little,
Valor and pride excel themselves in Hector, 
The one almost as infinite as all, 
The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood,
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home;
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
This blended knight, half Troyan and half Greek.
A maiden battle then? O, I perceive you.
Here is Sir Diomed. Go, gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax. As you and Lord Aeneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it, either to the uttermost,
Or else a breath. The combatants being kin
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
What Troyan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word, 
Speaking [in] deeds, and deedless in his tongue,
Not soon provoked, nor being provoked soon calmed; 
His heart and hand both open and both free, 
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows,
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impare thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action
Is more vindicative than jealous love.
They call him Troilus, and on him erect
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth
Even to his inches, and with private soul
Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me,
They are in action. Now, Ajax, hold thine own!
His blows are well disposed. There, Ajax!
You must no more.  Princes, enough, so please you.
I am not warm yet, let us fight again. 
As Hector pleases.  Why then will I no more.
Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
A cousin-german to great Priam's seed;
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain.
Were thy commixtion Greek and Troyan so
That thou couldst say, "This hand is Grecian all,
And this is Troyan; the sinews of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy; my mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my father's": by Jove multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
[Of our rank feud]; but the just gods gainsay
That any [drop] thou borrowedst from thy mother,
My sacred aunt, should by my mortal sword
Be drained! Let me embrace thee, Ajax.
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms!
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cousin, all honor to thee!  I thank thee, Hector.
Thou art too gentle and too free a man. 
I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence 
A great addition earned in thy death.
Not Neoptolemus so mirable,
On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st Oyes
Cries, "This is he," could promise to himself
A thought of added honor torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do.  We'll answer it:
The issue is embracement. Ajax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance, I would desire
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.
'Tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.
Aeneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
And signify this loving interview
To the expecters of our Troyan part;
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my cousin.
I will go eat with thee and see your knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here. 
The worthiest of them tell me name by name; 
But for Achilles, my own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy all arms! as welcome as to one
That would be rid of such an enemy.
[But that's no welcome. Understand more clear,
What,s past and what's to come is strewed with husks
And formless ruin of oblivion;
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strained purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
Bids thee, with most divine integrity,]
From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.
I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon.
My well-famed lord of Troy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?  The noble Menelaus.
O, you, my lord? By Mars his gauntlet, thanks! 
Mock not [that I] affect th' untraded [oath],
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove. 
She's well, but bade me not commend her to you. 
Name her not now, sir, she's a deadly theme.
I have, thou gallant Troyan, seen thee oft,
Laboring for destiny, make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee,
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
Despising many forfeits and subduements,
When thou hast hung [thy] advanced sword i' th' air,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers-by
"Lo Jupiter is yonder, dealing life!"
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have [hemmed] thee in,
Like an Olympian wrastling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance, still locked in steel,
I never saw till now. I knew thy grandsire,
And once fought with him. He was a soldier good,
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
Never like thee. O, let an old man embrace thee, 
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.
Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle, 
That hast so long walked hand in hand with time.
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention,
[As they contend with thee in courtesy].
By this white beard, I'd fight with thee tomorrow.
Well, welcome, welcome! -- I have seen the time.
I wonder now how yonder city stands
When we have here her base and pillar by us.
I know your favor, Lord Ulysses, well.
Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Troyan dead
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed
In Ilion, on your Greekish embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue.
My prophecy is but half his journey yet,
For yonder walls that pertly front your town,
Yon towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet. I must not believe you. 
There they stand yet, and modestly I think
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost 
A drop of Grecian blood. The end crowns all, 
And that old common arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.  So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome!
After the general, I beseech you next
To feast with me and see me at my tent.
I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou!
Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
I have with exact view perused thee, Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.  Is this Achilles?
Stand fair, I pray thee, let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.  Nay, I have done already.
Thou art too brief. I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
O, like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er;
But there's more in me than thou understand st.
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye? 
Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him -- whether there, or there, there? -- 
That I may give the local wound a name, 
And make distinct the very breach whereout
Hector's great spirit flew. Answer me, heavens!
It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
To answer such a question. Stand again.
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?  I tell thee, yea.
Wert thou an oracle to tell me so,
I'd not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee well,
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that [stithied] Mars his helm,
I'll kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag.
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But I'll endeavor deeds to match these words,
Or may I never --  Do not chafe thee, cousin,
And you, Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you to't. 
You may have every day enough of Hector,
If you have stomach. The general state, I fear, 
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him. 
I pray you let us see you in the field;
We have had pelting wars since you refused
The Grecians, cause.  Dost thou entreat me, Hector?
tomorrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
tonight all friends.  Thy hand upon that match.
First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent;
There in the full convive we. Afterwards,
As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
[Beat loud the taborins,] let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus.
There Diomed doth feast with him tonight,
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view 
Shall I, sweet lord, be bound to you so much,
After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
To bring me thither?  You shall command me, sir. 
But gentle tell me, of what honor was
This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there 
O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
A mock is due. Will you walk on, my lord?
She was beloved, [she loved]; she is, and doth:
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth.
I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine tonight,
Which with my scimitar I'll cool tomorrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.
Here comes Thersites.  How now, thou [core] of envy?
Thou crusty batch of nature, what's the news?
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in tomorrow's battle.
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair love,
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it.
Fall Greeks, fail fame, honor or go or stay,
My major vow lies here; this I'll obey.
Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent;
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
With too much blood and too little brain,
these two may run mad, but, if with too much brain
and too little blood they do, I'll be a curer of madmen.
Here's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough,
There where we see the lights.  I trouble you.
No, not a whit.  Here comes himself to guide you. 
Welcome, brave Hector, welcome, princes all.
So now, fair Prince of Troy, I bid good night. 
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you. 
Thanks and good night to the Greeks' general.
Old Nestor tarries; and you too, Diomed,
Keep Hector company an hour or two.
I cannot, lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now. Good night, great Hector.
Nay, stay; by Jove I will not speak a word.
There is between my will and all offenses
A guard of patience. Stay a little while.
How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump
and potato finger, tickles [these] together! 
O all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge!
Thy master now lies thinking on his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it,
As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from me.
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
You shall not have it, Diomed, faith, you shall not.
'Twas one's that loved me better than you will.
But now you have it, take it.  Whose was it?
By all Diana's waiting-women yond, 
And by herself, I will not tell you whose. 
tomorrow will I wear it on my helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, and wor'st it on thy horn, 
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past. And yet it is not;
I will not keep my word.  Why then farewell,
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
You shall not go. One cannot speak a word
Nor I, by Pluto; but that that likes not you
pleases me best. What, shall I come? The hour --
Ay, come -- O Jove! -- do come. -- I shall be plagued. 
Farewell till then.  Good night. I prithee come. 
Troilus, farewell! one eye yet looks on thee, 
But with my heart the other eye doth see. 
Ah, poor our sex! this fault in us I find,
The error of our eye directs our mind.
What error leads must err; O then conclude,
Minds swayed by eyes are full of turpitude. 
A proof of strength she could not publish more,
Unless she said, "My mind is now turned whore."
All's done, my lord.  It is.  Why stay we then?
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke.
But if I tell how these two did [co-act],
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That doth invert th' attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs [had deceptious] functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressid here?  I cannot conjure, Troyan.
She was not, sure.  Most sure she was. 
Why, my negation hath no taste of madness.
Nor mine, my lord; Cressid was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood!
Think we had mothers, do not give advantage
To stubborn critics, apt without a theme
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cressid's rule. Rather think this not Cressid.
What hath she done, Prince, that can [soil]
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will 'a swagger himself out on's own eyes?
This she? no, this is Diomed's Cressida.
If beauty have a soul, this is not she;
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods' delight,
If there be rule in unity itself,
This was not she. O madness of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against itself!
Bi-fold authority, where reason can revolt 
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason
Without revolt. This is, and is not, Cressid! 
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight 
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparate
Divides more wider than the sky and earth,
And yet the spacious breadth of this division
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter.
Instance, O instance, strong as Pluto's gates,
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven;
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven itself,
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved, and loosed,
And with another knot, [five]-finger-tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics
Of her o'er-eaten faith, are given to Diomed.
May worthy Troilus be half attached
With that which here his passion doth express?
Ay, Greek, and that shall be divulged well
In characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus. Never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so fixed a soul.
Hark, Greek: as much [as] I do Cressid love, 
So much by weight hate I her Diomed.
That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm. 
Were it a casque composed by Vulcan's skill, 
My sword should bite it. Not the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringed in mass by the almighty sun,
Shall dizzy with more clamor Neptune's ear,
In his descent, than shall my prompted sword
O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false!
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And they'll seem glorious.  O, contain yourself;
I have been seeking you this hour, my lord.
Hector by this is arming him in Troy;
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you, Prince. My courteous lord, adieu.
Farewell, revolted fair! and, Diomed, 
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head!
I'll bring you to the gates. Accept distracted thanks. 
When was my lord so much ungently tempered
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight today.
You train me to offend you, get you in.
By all the everlasting gods, I'll go!
My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day. 
No more, I say.  Where is my brother Hector?
Here, sister, armed, and bloody in intent.
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees; for I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
O, 'tis true.  Ho! bid my trumpet sound!
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Be gone, I say, the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows;
They are polluted off'rings, more abhorred
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
O, be persuaded! do not count it holy
[To hurt by being just; it is as lawful,
For we would give much, to [use] violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.]
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow,
But vows to every purpose must not hold; 
Unarm, sweet Hector.  Hold you still, I say; 
Mine honor keeps the weather of my fate. 
Life every man holds dear, but the dear man
Holds honor far more precious-dear than life.
How now, young man, meanest thou to fight today?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
No, faith, young Troilus, doff thy harness, youth,
I am today i' th' vein of chivalry.
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave boy,
I'll stand today for thee and me and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a lion than a man.
What vice is that? Good Troilus, chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword, 
You bid them rise and live. O, 'tis fair play. 
Fool's play, by heaven, Hector. How now? how now?
Let's leave the hermit pity with our mother,
And when we have our armors buckled on,
The venomed vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth.
Fie, savage, fie!  Hector, then 'tis wars.
Troilus, I would not have you fight today.
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
Beck'ning with fiery truncheon my retire,
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears,
Nor you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way,
Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast, 
He is thy crutch. Now if thou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee, 
Fall all together.  Come, Hector, come, go back.
wife hath dreamt, thy mother hath had visions,
Cassandra doth foresee, and I myself
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.  Aeneas is a-field,
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valor, to appear
You know me dutiful, therefore, dear sir,
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him.  Do not, dear father.
Andromache, I am offended with you,
Upon the love you bear me, get you in. 
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl 
Makes all these bodements.   O, farewell, dear Hector.
Look how thou diest, look how thy eye turns pale.
Look how thy wounds do bleed at many vents,
Hark how Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out,
How poor Andromache shrills her dolors forth.
Behold, [distraction], frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless antics, one another meet,
And all cry, Hector! Hector's dead! O Hector!
Farewell; yet soft: Hector, I take my leave.
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive. 
You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim.
Go in and cheer the town. We'll forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell, the gods with safety stand about thee! 
They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe, 
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve. 
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart;
Th' effect doth operate another way.
Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.
My love with words and errors still she feeds,
But edifies another with her deeds. 
Now they are clapper-clawing one another;
I would swim after.  Thou dost miscall retire.
I do not fly, but advantageous care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude.
Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas
Hath beat down Menon; bastard Margarelon
And stands Colossus-wise, waving his beam,
Upon the pashed corses of the kings
Epistrophus and Cedius; Polyxenes is slain,
Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt,
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes 
Sore hurt and bruised. The dreadful Sagittary
Appalls our numbers. Haste we, Diomed, 
To reinforcement, or we perish all. 
Go bear Patroclus' body to Achilles,
And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks work; anon he's there afoot,
And there they fly or die, like scaling sculls
Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,
And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him like a mower's swath.
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes,
Dexterity so obeying appetite
That what he will he does, and does so much
That proof is called impossibility.
O, courage, courage, princes! Great Achilles 
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance. 
Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood, 
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noseless, handless, hacked and chipped, come to him,
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend,
And foams at mouth, and he is armed and at it,
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done today
Mad and fantastic execution,
Engaging and redeeming of himself
With such a careless force, and forceless care,
As if that [luck], in very spite of cunning,
Bade him win all. Troilus, thou coward Troilus! 
Ay, there, there. So, so, we draw together. 
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face,
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry. 
Hector, where's Hector? I will none but Hector. 
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head!
Troilus, I say, where's Troilus?  What wouldst thou?
Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
Ere that correction. Troilus, I say, what, Troilus!
O traitor Diomed! turn thy false face, 
And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse. 
I'll fight with him alone. Stand, Diomed. 
He is my prize, I will not look upon. 
Come both you cogging Greeks, have at you both! 
Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
Now do I see thee, ha! Have at thee, Hector! 
I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Troyan.
Be happy that my arms are out of use;
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again;
Till when, go seek thy fortune. Fare thee well.
I would have been much more a fresher man, 
Had I expected thee. How now, my brother?
Ajax hath ta'en Aeneas! Shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him; I'll be ta'en too,
Or bring him off. Fate, hear me what I say!
I reak not though I end my life today. 
Stand, stand, thou Greek, thou art a goodly mark.
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armor well;
I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all,
Why then fly on, I'll hunt thee for thy hide. 
Come here about me, you my Myrmidons,
Mark what I say. Attend me where I wheel; 
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath, 
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about,
In fellest manner execute your arms.
Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye,
It is decreed Hector the great must die. 
The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it.
Most putrefied core, so fair without,
Thy goodly armor thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my day's work done, I'll take [good] breath.
Rest, sword, thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set,
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels; 
Even with the vail and dark'ning of the sun,
To close the day up, Hector's life is done. 
I am unarmed, forgo this vantage, Greek. 
Strike, fellows, strike, this is the man I seek. 
So, Ilion, fall thou next! Come, Troy, sink down!
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain,
"Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain!" 
Hark, a retire upon our Grecian part.
The Troyans' trumpet sound the like, my lord.
The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth,
And stickler-like the armies separates.
My half-supped sword that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.
Come tie his body to my horse's tail,
Along the field I will the Troyan trail. 
Hark, hark, what [shout] is this? Peace, drums!
Achilles! Achilles! Hector's slain! Achilles!
The bruit is, Hector's slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet bragless let it be,
Great Hector was as good a man as he. 
March patiently along; let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our tent. 
If in his death the gods have us befriended, 
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Never go home, here starve we out the night -- 
Hector is slain. Hector! the gods forbid!
He's dead, and at the murtherer's horse's tail,
In beastly sort, dragged through the shameful field.
Frown on, you heavens, effect your rage with speed!
Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smile at Troy!
I say, at once, let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on!
My lord, you do discomfort all the host.
You understand me not that tell me so. 
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men 
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone. 
Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba?
Let him that will a scritch-owl aye be called
Go in to Troy and say [there,] "Hector's dead!"
There is a word will Priam turn to stone,
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,
Cold statues of the youth, and in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself. [But march away.
Hector is dead;] there is no more to say.
Stay yet. You [vile] abominable tents,
Thus proudly [pight] upon our Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
I'll through and through you! and, thou great-sized coward,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates.
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts.
Strike a free march. To Troy with comfort go;
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name!
A goodly medicine for my aching bones!
O world, world, [world!] thus is the poor agent
despised! O [traders] and bawds, how earnestly are
you set a-work, and how ill requited! Why should our
endeavor be so loved and the performance so loathed?
What verse for it? What instance for it? Let me see:
Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
As many as be here of Pandar's hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for [your] aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-[door] trade, 
Some two months hence my will shall here be made.
It should be now, but that my fear is this, 
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss. 
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeath you my diseases. 
