<wivVS> Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt, vanish like hailstones; go!
Trudge! plod away i' th' hoof!  Seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the [humor] of the age,
French thrift, you rogues -- myself and skirted page. 
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor.
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Wilt thou revenge? By welkin and her star!
With wit or steel? With both the humors, I.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford.
He loves the gallimaufry, Ford.  Perpend.
With liver burning hot.  Prevent; or go thou
What name, sir? The horn, I say.  Farewell.
I will be patient; I will find out this.
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Yes, and you heard what the other told me? 
How now, bully-rook? thou'rt a gentleman. 
Good mine host o' th' Garter, a word with you.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Fare thee well, commend me to them both.
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers.
Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;
Say'st thou so, old Jack? go thy ways.
I'll make more of thy old body than I have done.
Where had you this pretty weathercock?
He, he -- I can never hit on 's name.
There is such a league between my goodman and he!
Is your wife at home indeed? Indeed she is.
By your leave, sir. I am sick till I see her.
Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? 
Do so.  Go tell thy master I am alone.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hiss me.
Heaven make you better than your thoughts! 
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford. 
Be-gar, nor I too; there is no-bodies.
Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not ashamed?
What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination?
'Tis my fault, Master Page.  I suffer for it.
Dat is good, by gar; with all my heart!
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
I see I cannot get thy father's love,
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
Alas, how then? Why, thou must be thyself.
He doth object I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense, 
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me, 
My riots past, my wild societies, 
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee, Anne;
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold, or sums in sealed bags;
And 'tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at. Gentle Master Fenton,
Yet seek my father's love, still seek it, sir.
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why then hark you hither!
I come to him.   This is my father's choice.
O, what a world of vild ill-favored faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
Now, good Mistress Anne -- What is your will?
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
Now, Master Slender.  Love him, daughter Anne.
Why, how now?  What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child. 
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colors of my love,
And not retire. Let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
I mean it not, I seek you a better husband.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' th' earth,
Come, trouble not yourself.  Good Master Fenton, 
I will not be your friend nor enemy.
My daughter will I question how she loves you, go 
And as I find her, so am I affected. 
Till then farewell, sir; she must needs go in,
Farewell, gentle mistress; farewell, Nan.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once tonight
Give my sweet Nan this ring.  There's for thy pains.
Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
'Tis old, but true: still swine eats all the draff. 
Pray heaven it be not fall of knight again.
Now shall the devil be shamed.  What, wife, I say!
Pardon me, wife, henceforth do what thou wilt.
I rather will suspect the sun with [cold]
Than thee with wantonness.  Now doth thy honor stand,
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith. 'Tis well, 'tis well, no more.
Be not as extreme in submission as in offense;
But let our plot go forward.  Let our wives
Yet once again (to make us public sport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it. 
There is no better way than that they spoke of. 
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes, that Herne the Hunter
(Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest)
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And [makes] milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner. 
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld 
Received and did deliver to our age 
This tale of Herne the Hunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak.
But what of this? Marry, this is our device:
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
Disguised like [Herne], with huge horns on his head.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
Like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands. Upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song. Upon their sight, 
We two in great amazedness will fly;
Then let them all encircle him about, 
And fairy-like to pinch the unclean knight; 
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane. And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound,
And burn him with their tapers. The truth being known,
We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor. The children must
Be practiced well to this, or they'll nev'r do't.
I will teach the children their behaviors;
That will be excellent.  I'll go buy them vizards.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy.   And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away, 
Nay, I'll to him again in name of [Brook];
He'll tell me all his purpose. Sure he'll come.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
Send Quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.
I'll to the doctor, he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender (though well landed) is an idiot;
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well moneyed, and his friends
Potent at court. He, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And (as I am a gentleman) I'll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath answered my affection
(So far forth as herself might be her chooser)
Even to my wish.  I have a letter from her 
Of such contents as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter, 
That neither, singly, can be manifested 
Without the show of both.  Fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene; the image of the jest
I'll show you here at large.  Hark, good mine host:
tonight at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen;
The purpose why, is here; in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry. She hath consented.
Her mother (even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius) hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the dean'ry, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her.  To this her mother's plot
She (seemingly obedient) likewise hath
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white; 
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go, 
She shall go with him. Her mother hath intended 
(The better to [denote] her to the doctor,
For they must all be masked and vizarded)
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribands pendant, flaring 'bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Both, my good host, to go along with me.
And here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church, 'twixt twelve and one,
And in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.
Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I'll make a present recompense.  
Prithee no more prattling.  Go, I'll hold. 
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers, and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy Oyes.
Elves, list your names; silence, you aery toys!
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap;
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry;
Our radiant Queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies, he that speaks to them shall die. 
I'll wink and couch; no man their works must eye.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy,
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy;
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out.
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flow'r;
Each fair installment, coat, and sev'ral crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring.
Th' expressure that it bears, green let it be, 
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
In em'rald tuffs, flow'rs purple, blue, and white, 
Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee:
Fairies use flow'rs for their charactery.
Away, disperse! but till 'tis one a' clock,
Our dance of custom, round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanthorns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle-earth.
Vild worm, thou wast o'erlooked even in thy birth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end.
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
A trial, come.  Come, will this wood take fire?
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies, sing a scornful rhyme,
And as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
Nay, do not fly, I think we have watched you now.
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you come, hold up the jest no higher.
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?
And one that is as slanderous as Sathan?
And as poor as Job? And as wicked as his wife?
And given to fornications, and to taverns,
This is strange.  Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me. Here comes Master Fenton.
Pardon, good father!  good my mother, pardon!
Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?
You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I (long since contracted)
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
Th' offense is holy that she hath committed,
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy.
In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state; 
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
What cannot be eschewed must be embraced.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.
Well, I will muse no further.  Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire --
Sir John and all. Let it be so. Sir John,
To Master [Brook] you yet shall hold your word,
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
