<WTvs> Nine changes of the wat'ry star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen. Time as long again
Would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks,
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt. And therefore, like a cipher
(Yet standing in rich place), I multiply
With one "We thank you" many thousands moe 
That go before it. Stay your thanks a while, 
And pay them when you part. Sir, that's tomorrow.
I am questioned by my fears of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say,
"This is put forth too truly." Besides, I have stayed
To tire your royalty. We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to't. No longer stay.
One sev'nnight longer. Very sooth, tomorrow.
We'll part the time between's then; and in that
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' th' world,
So soon as yours could win me. So it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward; which to hinder 
Were (in your love) a whip to me; my stay,
To you a charge and trouble. To save both, 
Farewell, our brother. Tongue-tied our queen? Speak you.
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You had drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him you are sure
All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaimed. Say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward. Well said, Hermione.
To tell he longs to see his son were strong;
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefixed for 's parting; yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' th' clock behind
What lady she her lord. You'll stay? No, madam. 
Nay, but you will? I may not, verily. 
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek t' unsphere the stars with oaths,
Should yet say,"Sir, no going." Verily,
You shall not go; a lady's "verily" is
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest: so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? By your dread"verily,"
One of them you shall be. Your guest then, madam.
To be your prisoner should import offending,
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish. Not your jailer then,
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys.
You were pretty lordings then? We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind 
But such a day tomorrow as today, 
And to be boy eternal. Was not my lord
We were as twinned lambs that did frisk i' th' sun,
And bleat the one at th' other. What we changed
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher reared
With stronger blood, we should have answered heaven
Boldly,"Not guilty"; the imposition cleared,
Hereditary ours. By this we gather
You have tripped since. O my most sacred lady,
Temptations have since then been born to 's: for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes 
Of my young playfellow. Grace to boot! 
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say 
Your queen and I are devils. Yet go on,
Th' offenses we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinned with us, and that with us
You did continue fault, and that you slipped not
With any but with us. Is he won yet?
He'll stay, my lord. At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spok'st
To better purpose. Never? Never, but once.
What? have I twice said well? When was't before?
I prithee tell me; cram 's with praise, and make 's
As fat as tame things. One good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages. You may ride 's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we heat an acre. But to th' goal: 
My last good deed was to entreat his stay;
What was my first? It has an elder sister, 
Or I mistake you. O, would her name were Grace! 
But once before I spoke to th' purpose? when?
Nay, let me have't; I long. Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had soured themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand,
[And] clap thyself my love; then didst thou utter,
Why, lo you now! I have spoke to th' purpose twice:
The one for ever earned a royal husband;
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
And well become the agent; 't may -- I grant.
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers, 
As now they are, and making practiced smiles,
As in a looking-glass; and then to sigh, as 'twere 
The mort o' th' deer -- O, that is entertainment 
My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius,
Art thou my boy? Ay, my good lord. I' fecks!
Why, that's my bawcock. What? [hast] smutched thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heckfer, and the calf
Are all called neat. -- Still virginalling
Upon his palm? -- How now, you wanton calf,
Art thou my calf? Yes, if you will, my lord.
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me; yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so --
That will say any thing. But were they false
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wished by one that fixes 
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page, 
Look on me with your welkin eye. Sweet villain! 
Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam? -- may't be? --
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre.
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicat'st with dreams (how can this be?),
With what's unreal thou co-active art,
And fellow'st nothing. Then 'tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something, and thou dost
(And that beyond commission), and I find it
(And that to the infection of my brains
And hard'ning of my brows). What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled. How? my lord? 
What cheer? How is't with you, best brother? You look
As if you held a brow of much distraction.
Are you moved, my lord? No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly!
Its tenderness! and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreeched
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove
(As [ornament] oft does) too dangerous.
How like (methought) I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
You will? Why, happy man be 's dole! My brother, 
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours? If at home, sir, 
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter;
Now my sworn friend, and then mine enemy;
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all.
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood. So stands this squire
Officed with me. We two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lov'st us, show in our brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap.
Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
Apparent to my heart. If you would seek us,
We are yours i' th' garden. Shall 's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you; you'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky. I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
How she holds up the neb! the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife 
To her allowing husband! Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and ears a forked one!
Go play, boy, play. Thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamor
Will be my knell. Go play, boy, play. There have been
(Or I am much deceived) cuckolds ere now,
And many a man there is (even at this present,
Now, while I speak this) holds his wife by th' arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence,
And his pond fished by his next neighbor -- by
Sir Smile, his neighbor. Nay, there's comfort in't,
Whiles other men have gates, and those gates opened,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there's none.
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis pow'rful -- think it -- 
From east, west, north, and south. Be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly. Know't, 
It will let in and out the enemy, 
With bag and baggage. Many thousand on 's
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy?
I am like you, [they] say. Why, that's some comfort.
What? Camillo there? Ay, my good lord.
Go play, Mamillius, thou'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold,
When you cast out, it still came home. Didst note it?
He would not stay at your petitions, made
His business more material. Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already, whisp'ring, rounding:
"Sicilia is a so-forth." 'Tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. -- How came't, Camillo,
That he did stay? At the good Queen's entreaty.
At the Queen's be't; "good" should be pertinent, 
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks. Not noted, is't,
But of the finer natures? By some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? Lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? Say.
Business, my lord? I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer. Ha? Stays here longer.
To satisfy your Highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress. Satisfy?
Th' entreaties of your mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom: I from thee departed 
Thy penitent reformed. But we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived 
In that which seems so. Be it forbid, my lord!
To bide upon't: thou art not honest; or
If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool,
That seest a game played home, the rich stake drawn,
And tak'st it all for jest. My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful:
In every one of these no man is free
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometimes puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were willful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I played the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted, 
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear 
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord, 
Are such allowed infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But beseech your Grace
Be plainer with me, let me know my trespass
By its own visage. If I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine. Ha' not you seen, Camillo
(But that's past doubt; you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn), or heard
(For to a vision so apparent rumor
Cannot be mute), or thought (for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think)
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wife's a [hobby]-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify,
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken. 'Shrew my heart, 
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin 
As deep as that, though true. Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to check? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughter with a sigh (a note infallible
Of breaking honesty)? horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why then the world and all that's in't is nothing,
The covering sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My wife is nothing, nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing. Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes,
For 'tis most dangerous. Say it be, 'tis true.
No, no, my lord. It is: you lie, you lie!
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee, 
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that 
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, 
Inclining to them both. Were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass. Who does infect her?
Why, he that wears her like her medal hanging
About his neck, Bohemia -- who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honor as their profits
(Their own particular thrifts), they would do that
Which should undo more doing; ay, and thou,
His cupbearer -- whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled -- mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial. Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a ling'ring dram that should not work 
Maliciously, like poison; but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress 
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets
(Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps),
Give scandal to the blood o' th' Prince my son
(Who I do think is mine and love as mine),
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench? I must believe you, sir.
I do, and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
Provided that, when he's removed, your Highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake, and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours. Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down. 
I'll give no blemish to her honor, none.
Go then; and with a countenance as clear 
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant. This is all:
Do't, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou split'st thine own. I'll do't, my lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
O miserable lady! But for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do't
Is the obedience to a master; one
Who, in rebellion with himself, will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourished after, I'ld not do't; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, 
Let villainy itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the court. To do't, or no, is certain 
To me a break-neck. Happy star reign now! 
Here comes Bohemia. This is strange; methinks
My favor here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo. Hail, most royal sir!
What is the news i' th, court? None rare, my lord.
The King hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself. Even now I met him
With customary compliment, when he,
Wafting his eyes to th' contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me, and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
How, dare not? Do not? Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me, 'tis thereabouts: 
For to yourself, what you do know, you must, 
And cannot say you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus altered with't. There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease, and it is caught
Of you that yet are well. How caught of me?
Make me not sighted like the basilisk.
I have looked on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but killed none so. Camillo,
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
In whose success we are gentle, I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be informed, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment. I may not answer.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well? 
I must be answered. Dost thou hear, Camillo, 
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honor does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near,
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it. Sir, I will tell you,
Since I am charged in honor and by him
That I think honorable. Therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be ev'n as swiftly followed as
I mean to utter it; or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night! On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murther you.
By whom, Camillo? By the King. For what?
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears, 
As he had seen't or been an instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touched his queen 
Forbiddenly. O then, my best blood turn
To an infected jelly, and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savor that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
Nay, hatred too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read! Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven, and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith, and will continue
The standing of his body. How should this grow?
I know not; but I am sure 'tis safer to
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty, 
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawned, away tonight! 
Your followers I will whisper to the business, 
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' th' city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain,
For by the honor of my parents, I
Have utt'red truth; which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemned by the King's own mouth -- thereon
His execution sworn. I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in's face. Give me thy hand,
Be pilot to me, and thy places shall
Still neighbor mine. My ships are ready, and
My people did expect my hence departure
Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great; and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent; and as he does conceive
He is dishonored by a man which ever 
Professed to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me. 
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort 
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo,
I will respect thee as a father, if
Thou bear'st my life off. Hence! Let us avoid.
It is in mine authority, to command
The keys of all the posterns. Please your Highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away. 
Take the boy to you; he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring. Come, my gracious lord,
No, I'll none of you. Why, my sweet lord?
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if 
I were a baby still. -- I love you better.
And why so, my lord? Not for because 
Your brows are blacker, yet black brows they say
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle,
Or a half-moon made with a pen. Who taught' this?
I learned it out of women's faces. Pray now
What color are your eyebrows? Blue, my lord.
Nay, that's a mock. I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows. Hark ye,
The Queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days, and then you'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you. She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk. Good time encounter her!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now 
I am for you again. Pray you sit by us,
And tell's a tale. Merry, or sad, shall't be? 
A sad tale's best for winter. I have one
Of sprites and goblins. Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down, come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; you're pow'rful at it.
There was a man -- Nay, come sit down; then on.
Dwelt by a churchyard. I will tell it softly,
Yond crickets shall not hear it. Come on then,
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way. I eyed them
In my just censure! in my true opinion! 
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed 
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steeped, and one may drink; depart,
And yet partake no venom (for his knowledge
Is not infected), but if one present
Th' abhorred ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pandar.
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted. That false villain
Whom I employed was pre-employed by him:
He has discovered my design, and I
Remain a pinched thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open? By his great authority,
Which often hath no less prevailed than so
Give me the boy. I am glad you did not nurse him. 
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him. What is this? Sport? 
Bear the boy hence, he shall not come about her.
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that she's big with, for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus. But I'ld say he had not;
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to th' nayward. You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say she is a goodly lady, and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest -- honorable.
Praise her but for this her without-door form
(Which on my faith deserves high speech) and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha (these petty brands
That calumny doth use -- O, I am out --
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself), these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
When you have said she's goodly, come between 
Ere you can say she's honest: but be't known
(From him that has most cause to grieve it should be) 
She's an adult'ress. Should a villain say so,
The most replenished villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake. You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes. O thou thing!
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism (making me the precedent)
Should a like language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar. I have said
She's an adult'ress, I have said with whom:
More -- she's a traitor, and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
But with her most vild principal -- that she's
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give bold'st titles; ay, and privy
To this their late escape. No, by my life, 
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that 
You thus have published me! Gentle my lord, 
You scarce can right me throughly, then, to say
You did mistake. No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A schoolboy's top. Away with her, to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks. There's some ill planet reigns;
I must be patient, till the heavens look
With an aspect more favorable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are, the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities; but I have
That honorable grief lodged here which burns 
Worse than tears drown. Beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities 
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so 
The King's will be performed! Shall I be heard?
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your Highness
My women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools,
There is no cause. When you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out; this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord,
I never wished to see you sorry, now
I trust I shall. My women, come, you have leave.
Beseech your Highness call the Queen again.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son. For her, my lord, 
I dare my life lay down -- and will do't, sir,
Please you t' accept it -- that the Queen is spotless 
I' th' eyes of heaven and to you -- I mean, 
In this which you accuse her. If it prove
She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false,
If she be. Hold your peaces. Good my lord --
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves.
You are abused, and by some putter-on
That will be damned for't. Would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honor-flawed,
I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for't. By mine honor,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see
To bring false generations. They are co-heirs,
And I had rather glib myself than they 
Should not produce fair issue. Cease, no more. 
You smell this business with a sense as cold 
As you feel doing thus and see withal
The instruments that feel. If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty,
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth. What? lack I credit?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honor true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how you might. Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you -- or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill -- cannot, or will not,
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice. The matter, 
The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on't, is all
Properly ours. And I wish, my liege, 
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture. How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity
(Which was as gross as ever touched conjecture,
That lacked sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to th' deed), doth push on this proceeding.
(For in an act of this importance 'twere
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomines and Dion, whom you know
Of stuffed sufficiency. Now, from the oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had,
Though I am satisfied, and need no more 
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to th' minds of others -- such as he, 
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to th' truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come follow us,
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all. To laughter, as I take it,
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
Let him have knowledge who I am. Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee,
What dost thou then in prison? Now, good sir, 
You know me, do you not? For a worthy lady,
And one who much I honor. Pray you then,
Conduct me to the Queen. I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado, to lock up honesty
And honor from th' access of gentle visitors.
Is't lawful, pray you, to see her women?
Any of them? Emilia? So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth. I pray now call her. --
Withdraw yourselves. And, madam, I must
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes coloring. Dear gentlewoman,
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together. On her frights and griefs
(Which never tender lady hath borne greater)
She is, something before her time, delivered.
A boy? A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live. The Queen receives
Much comfort in't; says, "My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you." I dare be sworn.
These dangerous, unsafe lunes i' th' King, beshrew them!
He must be told on't, and he shall. The office
Becomes a woman best. I'll take't upon me.
If I prove honey-mouthed, let my tongue blister;
And never to my red-looked anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia, 
Commend my best obedience to the Queen.
If she dares trust me with her little babe, 
I'll show't the King, and undertake to be 
Her advocate to th' loud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' th' child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails. Most worthy madam,
Your honor and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue. There is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
Who but today hammered of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honor,
Lest she should be denied. Tell her, Emilia,
I'll use that tongue I have. If wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, let't not be doubted
I shall do good. Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the Queen. -- Please you, come something nearer. 
Madam, if't please the Queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it, 
Having no warrant. You need not fear it, sir.
This child was prisoner to the womb, and is
By law and process of great Nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the King, nor guilty of
(If any be) the trespass of the Queen.
Do not you fear. Upon mine honor, I
Nor night, nor day, no rest. It is but weakness
To bear the matter thus -- mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being -- part o' th' cause,
She th' adult'ress; for the harlot king 
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she 
I can hook to me -- say that she were gone, 
Given to the fire, a moi'ty of my rest
Might come to me again. Who's there? My lord?
How does the boy? He took good rest tonight;
Conceiving the dishonor of his mother!
He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened and fixed the shame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languished. Leave me solely; go,
See how he fares. Fie, fie, no thought of him;
The very thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance. Let him be,
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me; make their pastime at my sorrow: 
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she, within my pow'r. You must not enter.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me.
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the Queen's life? A gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous. That's enough.
Madam -- he hath not slept tonight, commanded
None should come at him. Not so hot, good sir,
I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him, and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humor
That presses him from sleep. [What] noise there, ho?
No noise, my lord, but needful conference 
About some gossips for your Highness. How?
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would. I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you. What? canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can. In this,
Unless he take the course that you have done --
Commit me for committing honor -- trust it,
He shall not rule me. La you now, you hear!
When she will take the rein I let her run, 
But she'll not stumble. Good my liege, I come -- 
And I beseech you hear me, who professes 
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor; yet that dares
Less appear so, in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours -- I say, I come
Good queen, my lord, good queen, I say good queen,
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you. Force her hence.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me. On mine own accord I'll off,
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen
(For she is good) hath brought you forth a daughter --
Here 'tis -- commends it to your blessing. Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door!
A most intelligencing bawd! Not so.
I am as ignorant in that, as you 
In so entit'ling me; and no less honest 
Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant
(As this world goes), to pass for honest. Traitors!
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard,
Thou dotard, thou art woman-tired; unroosted
By thy Dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard,
Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone. For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Tak'st up the Princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't! He dreads his wife.
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
You'ld call your children yours. A nest of traitors!
I am none, by this good light. Nor I, nor any
But one that's here -- and that's himself; for he 
The sacred honor of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander, 
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's, and will not 
(For as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compelled to't) once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound. A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband,
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine,
It is the issue of Polixenes.
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire! It is yours:
And might we lay th' old proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father -- eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger.
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast 
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colors
No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does, 
Her children not her husband's! A gross hag!
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hanged,
That wilt not stay her tongue. Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one subject. Once more, take her hence.
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more. I'll ha' thee burnt. I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen
(Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy) something savors
Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world. On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant, 
Where were her life? She durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her! 
I pray you do not push me, I'll be gone. 
Look to your babe, my lord, 'tis yours. Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? Away with't! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence,
And see it instantly consumed with fire.
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight.
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done
(And by good testimony), or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
For thou set'st on thy wife. I did not, sir.
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't. We can. My royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither. 
Beseech your Highness, give us better credit.
We have always truly served you, and beseech'
So to esteem of us; and on our knees we beg
(As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come) that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue. We all kneel.
I am a feather for each wind that blows.
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? Better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither.:
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life -- for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's grey -- what will you adventure
To save this brat's life? Any thing, my lord, 
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose; at least thus much: 
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left 
To save the innocent -- any thing possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding. I will, my lord.
Mark and perform it -- seest thou? for the fail
Of any point in't shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it
(Without more mercy) to it own protection,
And favor of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril, and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
I swear to do this -- though a present death 
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe.
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens 
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say, 
Casting their savageness aside, have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemned to loss! No! I'll not rear
Another's issue. Please' your Highness, posts
From those you sent to th' oracle are come
An hour since. Cleomines and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to th' court. So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond accompt. Twenty-three days
They have been absent. 'Tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have 
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords,
Summon a session, that we may arraign 
Our most disloyal lady; for as she hath 
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears. I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits
(Methinks I so should term them) and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn, and unearthly
It was i' th' off'ring! But of all, the burst 
And the ear-deaf'ning voice o' th' oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense, 
That I was nothing. If th' event o' th' journey
Prove as successful to the Queen (O be't so!)
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't. Great Apollo
Turn all to th' best! These proclamations,
I little like. The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business. When the oracle
(Thus by Apollo's great divine sealed up)
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go; fresh horses!
This sessions (to our great grief we pronounce) 
Even pushes 'gainst our heart -- the party tried, 
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleared
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
It is his Highness' pleasure that the Queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation, and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say "Not guilty." Mine integrity,
Being counted falsehood, shall (as I express it)
Be so received. But thus, if pow'rs divine
Behold our human actions (as they do), 
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush, and tyranny 
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know 
([Who] least will seem to do so) my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And Played to take spectators. For behold me,
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moi'ty of the throne, a great king's daughter,
The mother to a hopeful Prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honor 'fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare; for honor,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have strained t' appear thus; if one jot beyond
The bound of honor, or in act or will
That way inclining, hard'ned be the hearts 
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave! I ne'er heard yet 
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to Perform it first. That's true enough,
Though 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
You will not own it. More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes
(With whom I am accused), I do confess
I loved him as in honor he required;
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me; with a love even such,
So, and no other, as yourself commanded;
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely,
That it was yours. Now for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes, though it be dished 
For me to try how. All I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man; 
And why he left your court, the gods themselves 
(Wotting no more than I) are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.
You speak a language that I understand not.
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down. Your actions are my dreams.
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamed it. As you were past all shame
(Those of your fact are so), so past all truth;
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it (which is indeed
More criminal in thee than it), so thou
Shalt feel our justice; in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death. Sir, spare your threats.
The bug which you would fright me with, I seek.
To me can life be no commodity; 
The crown and comfort of my life, your favor,
I do give lost, for I do feel it gone, 
But know not how it went. My second joy 
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barred, like one infectious. My third comfort
(Starred most unluckily) is from my breast
(The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth)
Haled out to murther; myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet; with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i' th' open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this -- mistake me not; no life
(I prize it not a straw), but for mine honor,
Which I would free -- if I shall be condemned
Upon surmises (all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake), I tell you
'Tis rigor and not law. Your honors all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge! This your request
Is altogether just; therefore bring forth, 
And in Apollo's name, his oracle. 
The Emperor of Russia was my father.
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughter's trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomines and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
This sealed-up oracle, by the hand delivered
Of great Apollo's priest; and that since then
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in't. All this we swear.
Now blessed be the great Apollo! Praised!
Hast thou read truth? Ay, my lord, even so
There is no truth at all i' th' oracle.
The sessions shall proceed; this is mere falsehood.
My lord the King! the King! What is the business?
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The Prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the Queen's speed, is gone. How? gone? Is dead.
Apollo's angry, and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice. How now there?
This news is mortal to the Queen. Look down
And see what death is doing. Take her hence; 
Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover.
I have too much believed mine own suspicion.
Beseech you tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life. Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts, and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes; which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it and being done. He (most humane
And filled with honor) to my kingly guest
Unclasped my practice, quit his fortunes here 
(Which you knew great), and to the hazard of
All incertainties himself commended, 
No richer than his honor. How he glisters 
Through my rust! and how his piety
Does my deeds make the blacker! Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? What flaying? boiling
In leads or oils? What old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny,
Together working with thy jealousies
(Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine), O, think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed -- stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betrayedst Polixenes, 'twas nothing --
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant, 
And damnable ingrateful; nor was't much
Thou wouldst have poisoned good Camillo's honor, 
To have him kill a king -- poor trespasses, 
More monstrous standing by; whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little -- though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't;
Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
Of the young Prince, whose honorable thoughts
(Thoughts high for one so tender) cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemished his gracious dam; this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last -- O lords,
When I have said, cry "Woe!" -- the Queen, the Queen,
Not dropped down yet. The higher pow'rs forbid!
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see. If you can bring
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, 
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant! 
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier 
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees,
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain, and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert. Go on, go on;
Thou canst not speak too much, I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitt'rest. Say no more.
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
I' th' boldness of your speech. I am sorry for't.
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas, I have showed too much
The rashness of a woman; he is touched
To th' noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
Should be past grief. Do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punished, that have minded you 
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege,
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman. 
The love I bore your queen -- lo, fool again! -- 
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too. Take your patience to you.
And I'll say nothing. Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth; which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son.
One grave shall be for both; upon them shall
The causes of their death appear (unto
Our shame perpetual). Once a day I'll visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touched upon
The deserts of Bohemia? Ay, my lord, and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly, 
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry, 
Their sacred wills be done! Go get aboard;
Look to thy bark, I'll not be long before
I call upon thee. Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i' th' land; 'tis like to be loud weather.
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon't. Go thou away,
I'll follow instantly. I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' th' business. Come, poor babe.
I have heard (but not believed) the spirits o' th' dead
May walk again. If such thing be, thy mother
Appeared to me last night; for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another --
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So filled, and so becoming; in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach 
My cabin where I lay; thrice bowed before me,
And (gasping to begin some speech) her eyes 
Became two spouts; the fury spent, anon 
Did this break from her:"Good Antigonus,
Since fate (against thy better disposition)
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying; and for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita
I prithee call't. For this ungentle business,
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more." And so, with shrieks,
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so, and no slumber. Dreams are toys,
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffered death, and that
Apollo would (this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes) it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well! 
There lie, and there thy character; there these, 
Which may, if Fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins. Poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss, and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoined to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more; thou'rt like to have
A lullaby too rough. I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamor!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase;
I, that Please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me, or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my pow'r
To o'erthrow law, and in one self-born hour 
To Plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was, 
Or what is now received. I witness to 
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To th' freshest things now reigning, and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass, and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between. Leontes leaving --
Th' effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself -- imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' th' King's, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wond'ring. What of her ensues
I list not prophesy; but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth. A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is th' argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now; 
If never, yet that Time himself doth say,
He wishes earnestly you never may. 
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Does give a life; no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't. Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me.
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' th' land, you have obscured
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like pranked up. But that our feasts
In every mess have folly, and the feeders
Digest['t] with a custom, I should blush 
To see you so attired -- sworn, I think,
To show myself a glass. I bless the time 
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy father's ground. Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did. O, the Fates!
How would he look to see his work, so noble,
Vildly bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrowed flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence? Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves
(Humbling their deities to love) have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them. Jupiter
Became a bull and bellowed; the green Neptune
A ram and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer, 
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honor, nor my lusts 
Burn hotter than my faith. O but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold when 'tis
Opposed (as it must be) by th' pow'r of the King.
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
Or I my life. Thou dear'st Perdita,
With these forced thoughts I prithee darken not
The mirth o' th' feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's; for I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle!
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial, which
We two have sworn shall come. O Lady Fortune, 
Stand you auspicious! See, your guests approach, 
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly, 
Fie, daughter, when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song, and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' th' table, now i' th' middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labor, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' th' feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper. Sir, welcome. 
It is my father's will I should take on me
The hostess-ship o' th' day. You're welcome, sir. 
Give me those flow'rs there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep
Seeming and savor all the winter long.
Grace and remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our shearing! Shepherdess
(A fair one are you!), well you fit our ages
With flow'rs of winter. Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flow'rs o' th' season
Are our carnations and streaked gillyvors
(Which some call Nature's bastards). Of that kind
Our rustic garden's barren, and I care not
To get slips of them. Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them? For I have heard it said,
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating Nature. Say there be;
Yet Nature is made better by no mean 
But Nature makes that mean; so over that art 
Which you say adds to Nature, is an art
That Nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race. This is an art
Which does mend Nature -- change it rather; but 
The art itself is Nature. So it is. 
Then make [your] garden rich in gillyvors, 
And do not call them bastards. I'll not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well, and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flow'rs for you:
Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjorum,
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' th' sun,
And with him rises weeping. These are flow'rs
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. Y' are very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing. Out, alas!
You'ld be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through. Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flow'rs o' th' spring that might
Become your time of day -- and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet 
Your maidenheads growing. O Proserpina,
For the flow'rs now, that, frighted, thou let'st fall 
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets, dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes,
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primeroses,
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength (a malady
Most incident to maids); bold oxlips, and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds
(The flow'r-de-luce being one). O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er! What? like a corse?
No, like a bank, for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if -- not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flow'rs.
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals. Sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition. What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet, 
I'ld have you do it ever; when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sell so; so give alms; 
Pray so; and for the ord'ring your affairs, 
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
A wave o, th, sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function. Each your doing
(So singular in each particular)
Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
That all your acts are queens. O Doricles,
Your praises are too large. But that your youth,
And the true blood which peeps fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstained shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You wooed me the false way. I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to't. But come, our dance, I pray.
Your hand, my Perdita. So turtles pair
That never mean to part. I'll swear for 'em.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever 
Ran on the green-sod. Nothing she does, or seems,
But smacks of something greater than herself, 
Too noble for this place. He tells her something
That makes her blood look on't. Good sooth she is
The queen of curds and cream. Come on. Strike up.
Mopsa must be your mistress; marry, garlic,
To mend her kissing with! Now in good time!
Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners.
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding; but I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it.
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter.
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes; and to be plain, 
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best. She dances featly. 
So she does any thing, though I report it
That should be silent. If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
He's simple, and tells much. How now, fair shepherd?
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young,
And handed love as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks. I would have ransacked
The pedlar's silken treasury, and have poured it
To her acceptance; you have let him go,
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse, and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her. Old sir, I know 
She prizes not such trifles as these are.
The gifts she looks from me are packed and locked 
Up in my heart, which I have given already, 
But not delivered. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, whom, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
By th' northern blasts twice o'er. What follows this?
How prettily th' young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out.
But to your protestation; let me hear
What you profess. Do, and be witness to't.
And this my neighbor too? And he, and more
Than he, and men -- the earth, the heavens, and all:
That were I crowned the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her, employ them all, 
Commend them and condemn them to her service,
Or to their own perdition. Fairly offered. 
This shows a sound affection. But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him? I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better.
By th' pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his. Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his. O, that must be
I' th' virtue of your daughter. One being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet,
Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
And, daughter, yours. Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you.
Have you a father? I have; but what of him?
Knows he of this? He neither does, nor shall. 
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and alt'ring rheums? Can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish? No, good sir;
He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age. By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial. Reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father (all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity) should hold some counsel
In such a business. I yield all this; 
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint 
My father of this business. Let him know't.
He shall not. Prithee let him. No, he must not.
Let him, my son. He shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice. Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract. Mark your divorce, young sir,
Whom son I dare not call. Thou art too base
To be [acknowledged]. Thou, a sceptre's heir,
That thus affects a sheep-hook! Thou, old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal fool thou cop'st with -- O, my heart!
I'll have thy beauty scratched with briers and made 
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh 
That thou no more shalt see this knack (as never 
I mean thou shalt), we'll bar thee from succession,
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Farre than Deucalion off. Mark thou my words.
Follow us to the court. Thou, churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment --
Worthy enough a herdsman, yea, him too,
That makes himself (but for our honor therein)
Unworthy thee -- if ever, henceforth, thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or [hoop] his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't. Even here undone!
I was not much afeard; for once or twice
I was about to speak, and tell him plainly
The self-same sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage, but
Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this. Beseech you 
Of your own state take care. This dream of mine
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther, 
But milk my ewes, and weep. Why, how now, father?
Speak ere thou diest. I cannot speak, nor think,
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet; yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the Prince, and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! -- Undone, undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire. Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delayed,
But nothing alt'red. What I was, I am: 
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly. Gracious my lord, 
You know [your] father's temper. At this time
He will allow no speech (which I do guess
You do not purpose to him) and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear.
Then till the fury of his Highness settle
Come not before him. I not purpose it.
I think Camillo? Even he, my lord.
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
How often said my dignity would last
But till 'twere known! It cannot fail, but by
The violation of my faith, and then
Let nature crush the sides o' th' earth together,
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks.
From my succession wipe me, father, I
Am heir to my affection. Be advised.
I am -- and by my fancy. If my reason 
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness, 
Do bid it welcome. This is desperate, sir.
So call it; but it does fulfill my vow;
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat gleaned, for all the sun sees, or
The close earth wombs, or the profound seas hides
In unknown fadoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved. Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honored friend,
When he shall miss me (as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more), cast your good counsels
Upon his passion. Let myself and Fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
And so deliver: I am put to sea
With her who here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to her need I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting. O my lord,
I would your spirit were easier for advice, 
Or stronger for your need. Hark, Perdita! 
I'll hear you by and by. He's irremovable,
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honor,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see. Now, good Camillo,
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony. Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i' th' love
That I have borne your father? Very nobly
Have you deserved. It is my father's music
To speak your deeds; not little of his care
If you may please to think I love the King,
And through him what's nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honor,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving 
As shall become your Highness, where you may
Enjoy your mistress -- from the whom, I see, 
There's no disjunction to be made, but by 
(As heavens forfend!) your ruin -- marry her,
And with my best endeavors in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify,
And bring him up to liking. How, Camillo,
May this (almost a miracle) be done?
That I may call thee something more than man,
And after that trust to thee. Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go? Not any yet:
But as th' unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows. Then list to me.
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight: make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess
For so I see she must be 'fore Leontes. 
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see 
Leontes opening his free arms, and weeping 
His welcomes forth; asks thee there, son, forgiveness,
As 'twere i' th' father's person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness: th' me
He chides to hell, and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time. Worthy Camillo,
What color for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him? Sent by the King your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you (as from your father) shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your father's bosom there,
And speak his very heart. I am bound to you.
There is some sap in this. A course more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves 
To unpathed waters, undreamed shores, most certain 
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one, to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Where you'll be loath to be. Besides you know,
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters. One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind. Yea? say you so?
Be born another such. My good Camillo,
She's as forward of her breeding as
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach. Your pardon, sir; for this
I'll blush you thanks. My prettiest Perdita! 
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnished like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia. My lord,
Fear none of this. I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there. It shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed, as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want -- one word.
Fortunate mistress (let my prophecy
Come home to ye!), you must retire yourself
Into some covert. Take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and (as you can) disliken
The truth of your own seeming, that you may
(For I do fear eyes over) to shipboard
Get undescried. I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part. No remedy.
Have you done there? Should I now meet my father,
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend. Adieu, sir. 
O Perdita! what have we twain forgot?
What I do next shall be to tell the King
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
To force him after; in whose company
I shall re-view Sicilia, for whose sight
I have a woman's longing. Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to th' sea-side.
Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
A saint-like sorrow. No fault could you make 
Which you have not redeemed; indeed paid down 
More penitence than done trespass. At the last
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil,
With them, forgive yourself. Whilest I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself; which was so much
That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and
Destroyed the sweet'st companion that e'er man
Bred his hopes out of. True, too true, my lord.
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or, from the all that are, took something good
To make a perfect woman, she you killed
Would be unparalleled. I think so. Killed?
She I killed? I did so; but thou strik'st me
Sorely, to say I did. It is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom. Not at all, good lady.
You might have spoken a thousand things that would 
Have done the time more benefit, and graced 
Your kindness better. You are one of those
Would have him wed again. If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his Highness' fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom, and devour
Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to't? There is none worthy,
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfilled their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir 
Till his lost child be found? Which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason 
As my Antigonus to break his grave, 
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. Care not for issue,
The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander
Left his to th' worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best. Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honor, O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
I might have looked upon my queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips -- And left them
More rich for what they yielded. Thou speak'st truth:
No more such wives, therefore no wife. One worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage 
(Where we offenders now) appear soul-vexed,
And begin, 'Why to me -- ?" Had she such power, 
She had just cause. She had, and would incense me
To murther her I married. I should so:
Were I the ghost that walked, I'ld bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed
Should be "Remember mine." Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife, Paulina. Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?
Never, Paulina, so be blessed my spirit!
Then good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
You tempt him overmuch. Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture, 
Affront his eye. Good madam -- I have done. 
Yet if my lord will marry -- if you will, sir,
No remedy but you will -- give me the office
To choose you a queen. She shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As (walked your first queen's ghost) it should take joy
To see her in your arms. My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us. That
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his Princess (she
The fairest I have yet beheld), desires access
To your high presence. What with him? He comes not
Like to his father's greatness. His approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us 
'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
By need and accident. What train? But few, 
And those but mean. His princess, say you, with him?
Ay; the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on. O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Is colder than that theme,"She had not been,
Nor was not to be equalled" -- thus your verse
Flowed with her beauty once. 'Tis-shrewdly ebbed,
To say you have seen a better. Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot -- your pardon --
The other, when she has obtained your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes 
Of who she but bid follow. How? not women? 
Women will love her, that she is a woman 
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women. Go, Cleomines;
Yourself, assisted with your honored friends,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us. Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had paired
Well with this lord; there was not full a month
He dies to me again when talked of. Sure
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, Prince,
For she did print your royal father off, 
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one, 
Your father's image is so hit in you
(His very air) that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performed before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess -- goddess! O! alas,
I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You, gracious couple, do; and then I lost
(All mine own folly) the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom
(Though bearing misery) I desire my life
Once more to look on him. By his command
Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings that a king (at friend)
Can send his brother; and but infirmity
(Which waits upon worn times) hath something seized
His wished ability, he had himself
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you; whom he loves 
(He bade me say so) more than all the sceptres,
And those that bear them, living. O my brother, 
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. -- Welcome hither,
As is the spring to th' earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to th' fearful usage
(At least ungentle) of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
Th' adventure of her person? Good my lord,
She came from Libya. Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honored lord, is feared and loved?
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaimed his, parting with her; thence
(A prosperous south-wind friendly) we have crossed,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your Highness. My best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismissed; 
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir, 
But my arrival, and my wife's, in safety 
Purge all infection from our air whilest you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman, against whose person
(So sacred as it is) I have done sin,
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your father's blessed
(As he from heaven merits it) with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have looked on,
Such goodly things as you? Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has 
(His dignity and duty both cast off)
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with 
A shepherd's daughter. Where's Bohemia? speak.
Here, in your city; I now came from him.
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hast'ning (in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple), meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady, and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince. Camillo has betrayed me;
Whose honor and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers. Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the King your father. Who? Camillo?
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them 
With divers deaths in death. O my poor father! 
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have 
Our contract celebrated. You are married?
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be.
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first;
The odds for high and low's alike. My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king? She is,
That "once," I see, by your good father's speed,
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty; and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her. Dear, look up.
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, pow'r no jot
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir, 
Remember since you owed no more to time
Than I do now. With thought of such affections, 
Step forth mine advocate. At your request 
My father will grant precious things as trifles.
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle. Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in't. Not a month
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
Even in these looks I made. But your petition
Is yet unanswered. I will to your father.
Your honor not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you. Upon which errand
I now go toward him; therefore follow me,
And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee! What, sovereign sir,
I did not well, I meant well. All my services
You have paid home; but that you have vouchsafed,
With your crowned brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace, which never
My life may last to answer. O Paulina,
We honor you with trouble; but we came
To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery
Have we passed through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother. As she lived peerless, 
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels what ever yet you looked upon, 
Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it 
[Lonely], apart. But here it is; prepare
To see the life as lively mocked as ever
Still sleep mocked death. Behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence, it the more shows off
Your wonder; but yet speak. First, you, my liege;
Comes it not something near? Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding; for she was as tender
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems. O, not by much.
So much the more our carver's excellence,
Which lets go by some sixteen years, and makes her
As she lived now. As now she might have done, 
So much to my good comfort as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood, 
Even with such life of majesty (warm life, 
As now it coldly stands), when first I wooed her!
I am ashamed; does not the stone rebuke me
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjured to remembrance, and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee. And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
I kneel, and then implore her blessing. Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss. O, patience!
The statue is but newly fixed; the color's
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry. Scarce any joy
But killed itself much sooner. Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of the have pow'r 
To take off so much grief from you as he 
Will Piece up in himself. Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you (for the stone is mine),
I'ld not have showed it. Do not draw the curtain.
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves. Let be, let be.
Would I were dead but that methinks already --
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood? Masterly done!
The very life seems warm upon her lip.
The fixure of her eye has motion in't,
As we are mocked with art. I'll draw the curtain.
My lord's almost so far transported that
He'll think anon it lives. O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together! 
No settled senses of the world can match 
The pleasure of that madness. Let't alone.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirred you; but
I could afflict you farther. Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still methinks
There is an air comes from her. What fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her. Good my lord, forbear.
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
You'll mar it if you kiss it; stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
No! not these twenty years. So long could I
Stand by, a looker-on. Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it, 
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend,
And take you by the hand; but then you'll think 
(Which I protest against) I am assisted 
By wicked powers. What you can make her do,
I am content to look on; what to speak,
I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
To make her speak as move. It is required
You do awake your faith. Then, all stand still.
On; those that think it is unlawful business
I am about, let them depart. Proceed;
No foot shall stir. Music! awake her! strike! 
'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come;
I'll fill your grave up. Stir; nay, come away;
Bequeath to death your numbness; for from him
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs.
Start not; her actions shall be holy, as
You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her 
Until you see her die again, for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand. 
When she was young, you wooed her; now, in age, 
Is she become the suitor? O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating. She embraces him.
If she pertain to life let her speak too.
Ay, and make it manifest where she has lived,
Or how stol'n from the dead. That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale; but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam, kneel,
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady,
Our Perdita is found. You gods, look down 
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own, 
Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Least they desire (upon this push) to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all; your exultation
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some withered bough, and there
My mate (that's never to be found again)
Lament till I am lost. O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine,
But how, is to be questioned; for I saw her
(As I thought) dead; and have (in vain) said many
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far 
(For him, I partly know his mind) to find thee
An honorable husband. Come, Camillo, 
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty 
Is richly noted; and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
What? look upon my brother. Both your pardons,
That e'er I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This' your son-in-law,
And son unto the King, whom heavens directing
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand, and answer to his part
Performed in this wide gap of time, since first
We were dissevered. Hastily lead away.
